==================================================
METADATA
==================================================

format: PDF 1.4
producer: iText 1.4.8 (by lowagie.com)
creationDate: D:20260209123915Z
modDate: D:20260209123915Z
page_count: 25
file_size: 496199
file_name: Rabe2007_Global_strategy_for_the_diagnosis,_management,_and.pdf

==================================================
FULL TEXT
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
 
 
 
Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: GOLD executive summary.
Rabe, K.F.; Hurd, S.; Anzueto, A.; Barnes, P.J.; Buist, S.A.; Calverley, P.; Fukuchi, Y.; Jenkins, C.;
Rodriguez-Roisin, R.; Weel, C. van; Zielinski, J.
2007, Article / Letter to editor (American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 176, 6,
(2007), pp. 532-55)
Doi link to publisher: https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.200703-456SO
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version of the following full text: Publisher’s version
Downloaded from: https://hdl.handle.net/2066/51740
Download date: 2026-02-09
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:
To cite this publication please use the final published version (if applicable).


--- Page 2 ---
Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and
Prevention of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
GOLD Executive Summary
Klaus F. Rabe1, Suzanne Hurd2, Antonio Anzueto3, Peter J. Barnes4, Sonia A. Buist5, Peter Calverley6,
Yoshinosuke Fukuchi7, Christine Jenkins8, Roberto Rodriguez-Roisin9, Chris van Weel10, and Jan Zielinski11
1Leiden University Medical Center, Pulmonology, Leiden, The Netherlands; 2Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease,
Gaithersburg, Maryland; 3University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas; 4National Heart and Lung Institute, London,
United Kingdom; 5Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon; 6University Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, United Kingdom;
7Asian Paciﬁc Society of Respirology, Tokyo, Japan; 8Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, North Sydney, Australia;
9Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain; 10University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; and 11Institute of TB and Lung Diseases,
Warsaw, Poland
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) remains a major
public health problem. It is the fourth leading cause of chronic
morbidity and mortality in the United States, and is projected to rank
ﬁfth in 2020 in burden of disease worldwide, according to a study
published by the World Bank/World Health Organization. Yet,
COPD remains relatively unknown or ignored by the public as well
as public health and government ofﬁcials. In 1998, in an effort to
bring more attention to COPD, its management, and its prevention,
a committed group of scientists encouraged the U.S. National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute and the World Health Organization to
form the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease
(GOLD). Among the important objectives of GOLD are to increase
awareness of COPD and to help the millions of people who suffer
from this disease and die prematurely of it or its complications. The
ﬁrst step in the GOLD program was to prepare a consensus report,
Global Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of
COPD, published in 2001. The present, newly revised document
follows the same format as the original consensus report, but has
been updated to reﬂect the many publications on COPD that have
appeared. GOLD national leaders, a network of international
experts, have initiated investigations of the causes and prevalence
of COPD in their countries, and developed innovative approaches
for the dissemination and implementation of COPD management
guidelines. We appreciate the enormous amount of work the GOLD
national leaders have done on behalf of their patients with COPD.
Despite the achievements in the 5 years since the GOLD report was
originally published, considerable additional work is ahead of us if
we are to control this major public health problem. The GOLD
initiative will continue to bring COPD to the attention of govern-
ments, public health ofﬁcials, health care workers, and the general
public, but a concerted effort by all involved in health care will be
necessary.
Keywords: COPD; guidelines; human; chronic disease
CONTENTS
Introduction
Methodology and Summary of New Recommendations
Levels of Evidence
1. Deﬁnition, Classiﬁcation of Severity, and Mechanisms of
COPD
Deﬁnition
Spirometric Classiﬁcation of Severity and Stages of COPD
Pathology, Pathogenesis, and Pathophysiology
2. Burden of COPD
Epidemiology
Prevalence
Morbidity
Mortality
Economic and Social Burden of COPD
Risk Factors
Genes
Inhalational Exposures
Sex
Infection
Socioeconomic Status
3. The Four Components of COPD Management
Introduction
Component 1: Assess and Monitor Disease
Initial Diagnosis
Ongoing Monitoring and Assessment
Component 2: Reduce Risk Factors
Smoking Prevention and Cessation
Occupational Exposures
Indoor and Outdoor Air Pollution
Component 3: Manage Stable COPD
Introduction
Education
Pharmacologic Treatments
Nonpharmacologic Treatments
Special Considerations
Component 4: Manage Exacerbations
Introduction
Diagnosis and Assessment of Severity
Home Management
Hospital Management
Hospital Discharge and Follow-up
4. Translating Guideline Recommendations to the Context of
(Primary) Care
Diagnosis
Respiratory Symptoms
(Received in original form March 20, 2007; accepted in ﬁnal form May 15, 2007)
Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Prof. Klaus F.
Rabe, M.D., Ph.D., Leiden University Medical Center, Pulmonology, P.O. Box
9600, NL-2300 RC, Leiden, The Netherlands. E-mail: k.f.rabe@lumc.nl.
This article has an online supplement, which is accessible from this issue’s table of
contents at www.atsjournals.org
This document is available in a different format on the Global Initiative for Chronic
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) website at www.goldcopd.org/download.asp?
intId=380
Am J Respir Crit Care Med
Vol 176. pp 532–555, 2007
Originally Published in Press as DOI: 10.1164/rccm.200703-456SO on May 16, 2007
Internet address: www.atsjournals.org


--- Page 3 ---
Spirometry
Comorbidities
Reducing Exposure to Risk Factors
Implementation of COPD Guidelines
INTRODUCTION
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major
cause of chronic morbidity and mortality throughout the world.
Many people suffer from this disease for years and die pre-
maturely of it or its complications. The goals of the Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) are to
improve prevention and management of COPD through a con-
certed worldwide effort of people involved in all facets of health
care and health care policy, and to encourage an expanded level
of research interest in this highly prevalent disease.
One strategy to help achieve the objectives of GOLD is to
provide health care workers, health care authorities, and the
general public with state-of-the-art information about COPD
and speciﬁc recommendations on the most appropriate man-
agement and prevention strategies. The GOLD report, Global
Strategy for the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of
COPD, is based on the best-validated current concepts of
COPD pathogenesis and the available evidence on the most
appropriate management and prevention strategies. A major
part of the GOLD report is devoted to the clinical management
of COPD and presents a management plan with four compo-
nents: (1) assess and monitor disease, (2) reduce risk factors, (3)
manage stable COPD, and (4) manage exacerbations. A new
section at the end of the document will assist readers in
translating guideline recommendations to the context of (pri-
mary) care.
GOLD is a partner organization in a program launched in
March 2006 by the World Health Organization’s Global Alli-
ance Against Chronic Respiratory Diseases (GARD). Through
the work of the GOLD committees, and in cooperation with
GARD initiatives, progress toward better care for all patients
with COPD should be substantial in the next decade.
Methodology and Summary of New Recommendations
After the release of the 2001 GOLD report, a science commit-
tee was formed and charged with keeping the GOLD docu-
ments up-to-date by reviewing published research, evaluating
the impact of this research on the management recommenda-
tions in the GOLD documents, and posting yearly updates of
these documents on the GOLD website (www.goldcopd.org).
The methodology is described in each update (see, e.g., the 2005
update in Reference 3 and the APPENDIX in the online supple-
ment).
In January 2005, the GOLD science committee initiated
preparation of this revised 2006 document on the basis of the
most current scientiﬁc literature. Multiple meetings were held,
including several with GOLD national leaders to discuss con-
cepts and new recommendations. Before its publications, sev-
eral reviewers were invited to submit comments.
A summary of the issues presented in this report include the
following:
1. Recognition that COPD is characterized by chronic
airﬂow limitation and a range of pathologic changes in
the lung, some signiﬁcant extrapulmonary effects, and
important comorbidities that may contribute to the se-
verity of the disease in individual patients.
2. In the deﬁnition of COPD, the phrase ‘‘preventable and
treatable’’ has been incorporated following the American
Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society recom-
mendations to recognize the need to present a positive
outlook for patients, to encourage the health care com-
munity to take a more active role in developing programs
for COPD prevention, and to stimulate effective manage-
ment programs to treat those with the disease.
3. The spirometric classiﬁcation of severity of COPD now
includes four stages: stage I, mild; stage II, moderate;
stage III, severe; stage IV, very severe. A ﬁfth category,
‘‘stage 0, at risk,’’ that appeared in the 2001 report is no
longer included as a stage of COPD, as there is in-
complete evidence that the individuals who meet the
deﬁnition of ‘‘at risk’’ (chronic cough and sputum pro-
duction, normal spirometry) necessarily progress on to
stage I. Nevertheless, the importance of the public health
message that chronic cough and sputum are not normal is
unchanged.
4. The spirometric classiﬁcation of severity continues to
recommend use of the ﬁxed ratio post-bronchodilator
FEV1/FVC , 0.7 to deﬁne airﬂow limitation. Using the
ﬁxed ratio (FEV1/FVC) is particularly problematic in
patients with milder disease who are elderly because the
normal process of aging affects lung volumes. Post-
bronchodilator reference values in this population are
urgently needed to avoid potential overdiagnosis.
5. Section 2, BURDEN
OF COPD, provides references to
published data from prevalence surveys to estimate that
about 15 to 25% of adults aged 40 years and older may
have airﬂow limitation classiﬁed as stage I mild COPD or
higher and that the prevalence of COPD (stage I, mild
COPD and higher) is appreciably higher in smokers and
ex-smokers than in nonsmokers, in those over 40 years
compared with those younger than 40, and higher in men
than in women. The section also provides new data on
COPD morbidity and mortality.
6. Cigarette smoke is the most commonly encountered risk
factor for COPD and elimination of this risk factor is an
important step toward prevention and control of COPD.
However, other risk factors for COPD should be taken
into account where possible, including occupational
dusts and chemicals, and indoor air pollution from
biomass cooking and heating in poorly ventilated dwell-
ings—the latter especially among women in developing
countries.
7. The section on pathology, pathogenesis, and pathophys-
iology, continues with the theme that inhaled cigarette
smoke and other noxious particles cause lung inﬂamma-
tion, a normal response which appears to be ampliﬁed in
patients who develop COPD. The section has been
considerably updated and revised.
8. Management of COPD continues to be presented in four
components: (1) assess and monitor disease, (2) reduce
risk factors, (3) manage stable COPD, and (4) manage
exacerbations. All components have been updated on the
basis of recently published literature. Throughout it is
emphasized that the overall approach to managing stable
COPD should be individualized to address symptoms and
improve quality of life.
9. In COMPONENT 4, MANAGE EXACERBATIONS, a COPD
exacerbation is deﬁned as ‘‘an event in the natural course
of the disease characterized by a change in the patient’s
baseline dyspnea, cough, and/or sputum that is beyond
normal day-to-day variations, is acute in onset, and may
warrant a change in regular medication in a patient with
underlying COPD.’’
GOLD Executive Summary
533


--- Page 4 ---
10. It is widely recognized that a wide spectrum of health
care providers is required to ensure that COPD is
diagnosed accurately, and that individuals who have
COPD are treated effectively. The identiﬁcation of
effective health care teams will depend on the local
health care system, and much work remains to identify
how best to build these health care teams. A section on
COPD implementation programs and issues for clinical
practice has been included but it remains a ﬁeld that
requires considerable attention.
Levels of Evidence
Levels of evidence are assigned to management recommen-
dations where appropriate in subsections of section 3 that
discuss COPD management, with the system used in previous
GOLD reports (Table 1). Evidence levels are enclosed
in parentheses after the relevant statement—for example,
(Evidence A).
1. DEFINITION, CLASSIFICATION OF SEVERITY, AND
MECHANISMS OF COPD
Deﬁnition
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a preventable and
treatable disease with some signiﬁcant extrapulmonary effects that
may contribute to the severity in individual patients. Its pulmonary
component is characterized by airﬂow limitation that is not fully
reversible. The airﬂow limitation is usually progressive and associ-
ated with an abnormal inﬂammatory response of the lung to noxious
particles or gases.
The chronic airﬂow limitation characteristic of COPD is
caused by a mixture of small airway disease (obstructive
bronchiolitis) and parenchymal destruction (emphysema), the
relative contributions of which vary from person to person.
Airﬂow limitation is best measured by spirometry, because this
is the most widely available, reproducible test of lung function.
Because COPD often develops in longtime smokers in
middle age, patients often have a variety of other diseases
related to either smoking or aging (4). COPD itself also has
signiﬁcant extrapulmonary (systemic) effects that lead to
comorbid conditions (5). Thus, COPD should be managed with
careful attention also paid to comorbidities and their effect on
the patient’s quality of life. A careful differential diagnosis and
comprehensive assessment of severity of comorbid conditions
should be performed in every patient with chronic airﬂow
limitation.
Spirometric Classiﬁcation of Severity and Stages of COPD
For educational reasons, a simple spirometric classiﬁcation of
disease severity into four stages is recommended (Table 2).
Spirometry is essential for diagnosis and provides a useful
description of the severity of pathologic changes in COPD.
Speciﬁc spirometric cut points (e.g., post-bronchodilator FEV1/
FVC ratio , 0.70 or FEV1 , 80, 50, or 30% predicted) are used
for purposes of simplicity; these cut points have not been
clinically validated. A study in a random population sample
found that the post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC exceeded 0.70 in
all age groups, supporting the use of this ﬁxed ratio (6). How-
ever, because the process of aging does affect lung volumes, the
use of this ﬁxed ratio may result in overdiagnosis of COPD in
the elderly, especially in those with mild disease.
The characteristic symptoms of COPD are chronic and
progressive dyspnea, cough, and sputum production. Chronic
cough and sputum production may precede the development of
airﬂow limitation by many years. This pattern offers a unique
opportunity to identify smokers and others at risk for COPD,
and to intervene when the disease is not yet a major health
problem. Conversely, signiﬁcant airﬂow limitation may develop
without chronic cough and sputum production.
Stage I: mild COPD: Characterized by mild airﬂow limitation
(FEV1/FVC , 0.70, FEV1 > 80% predicted). Symptoms of
chronic cough and sputum production may be present, but
not always. At this stage, the individual is usually unaware
that his or her lung function is abnormal.
Stage II: moderate COPD: Characterized by worsening airﬂow
limitation (FEV1/FVC , 0.70, 50% < FEV1 , 80% pre-
dicted), with shortness of breath typically developing on
exertion and cough and sputum production sometimes also
present. This is the stage at which patients typically seek
medical attention because of chronic respiratory symptoms
or an exacerbation of their disease.
Stage III: severe COPD: Characterized by further worsening of
airﬂow limitation (FEV1/FVC , 0.70, 30% < FEV1 , 50%
predicted), greater shortness of breath, reduced exercise
capacity, fatigue, and repeated exacerbations that almost
always have an impact on patients’ quality of life.
TABLE 1. DESCRIPTION OF LEVELS OF EVIDENCE
Evidence
Category
Sources of Evidence
Deﬁnition
A
RCTs. Rich body of data.
Evidence is from endpoints of well-designed RCTs that provide a consistent pattern of ﬁndings
in the population for which the recommendation is made. Category A requires substantial numbers
of studies involving substantial numbers of participants.
B
RCTs. Limited body of data.
Evidence is from endpoints of intervention studies that include only a limited number of patients,
post hoc or subgroup analysis of RCTs, or meta-analysis of RCTs. In general, category B pertains
when few randomized trials exist, they are small in size, they were undertaken in a population
that differs from the target population of the recommendation, or the results are somewhat
inconsistent.
C
Nonrandomized trials.
Observational studies.
Evidence is from outcomes of uncontrolled or nonrandomized trials or from observational studies.
D
Panel consensus judgment.
This category is used only in cases where the provision of some guidance was deemed valuable but
the clinical literature addressing the subject was insufﬁcient to justify placement in one of the
other categories. The panel consensus is based on clinical experience or knowledge that does not
meet the above-listed criteria.
Deﬁnition of abbreviation: RCT 5 randomized controlled trial.
534
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 5 ---
Stage IV: very severe COPD: Characterized by severe airﬂow
limitation (FEV1/FVC , 0.70, FEV1 , 30% predicted or
FEV1 , 50% predicted plus the presence of chronic re-
spiratory failure). Respiratory failure is deﬁned as an arterial
partial pressure of O2 (PaO2) less than 8.0 kPa (60 mm Hg),
with or without an arterial partial pressure of CO2 (PaCO2)
greater than 6.7 kPa (50 mm Hg) while breathing air at sea
level. Respiratory failure may also lead to effects on the heart
such as cor pulmonale (right heart failure). Clinical signs of
cor pulmonale include elevation of the jugular venous
pressure and pitting ankle edema. Patients may have stage
IV COPD even if their FEV1 is greater than 30% predicted,
whenever these complications are present. At this stage,
quality of life is very appreciably impaired and exacerbations
may be life threatening.
Although asthma can usually be distinguished from COPD,
in some individuals with chronic respiratory symptoms and ﬁxed
airﬂow limitation it remains difﬁcult to differentiate the two
diseases. In many developing countries, both pulmonary tuber-
culosis and COPD are common (7). In countries where tuber-
culosis is very common, respiratory abnormalities may be too
readily attributed to this disease (8). Conversely, where the rate
of tuberculosis is greatly diminished, the possible diagnosis of
this disease is sometimes overlooked. Therefore, in all subjects
with symptoms of COPD, a possible diagnosis of tuberculosis
should be considered, especially in areas where this disease is
known to be prevalent (9).
Pathology, Pathogenesis, and Pathophysiology
Pathologic changes characteristic of COPD are found in the
proximal airways, peripheral airways, lung parenchyma, and
pulmonary vasculature (10). The pathologic changes include
chronic inﬂammation, with increased numbers of speciﬁc in-
ﬂammatory cell types in different parts of the lung, and struc-
tural changes resulting from repeated injury and repair. In
general, the inﬂammatory and structural changes in the airways
increase with disease severity and persist on smoking cessation.
The inﬂammation in the respiratory tract of patients with
COPD appears to be an ampliﬁcation of the normal inﬂamma-
tory response of the respiratory tract to chronic irritants such as
cigarette smoke. The mechanisms for this ampliﬁcation are not
yet understood but may be genetically determined. Some pa-
tients develop COPD without smoking, but the nature of the
inﬂammatory response in these patients is unknown (11). Lung
inﬂammation is further ampliﬁed by oxidative stress and an
excess of proteinases in the lung. Together, these mechanisms
lead to the characteristic pathologic changes in COPD.
There is now a good understanding of how the underlying
disease process in COPD leads to the characteristic physiologic
abnormalities and symptoms. For example, decreased FEV1
primarily results from inﬂammation and narrowing of periph-
eral airways and a dynamic airway collapse in more severe
emphysema, whereas decreased gas transfer arises from the
parenchymal destruction of emphysema. The extent of inﬂam-
mation, ﬁbrosis, and luminal exudates in small airways is
correlated with the reduction in FEV1 and FEV1/FVC ratio,
and probably with the accelerated decline in FEV1 character-
istic of COPD (4). Gas exchange abnormalities result in hy-
poxemia and hypercapnia, and have several mechanisms in
COPD. In general, gas transfer worsens as the disease pro-
gresses. Mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension may develop
late in the course of COPD and is due to hypoxic vasoconstric-
tion of small pulmonary arteries. It is increasingly recognized
that COPD involves several systemic features, particularly in
patients with severe disease, and that these have a major impact
on survival and comorbid diseases (12, 13).
2. BURDEN OF COPD
COPD prevalence, morbidity, and mortality vary across coun-
tries and across different groups within countries but, in general,
are directly related to the prevalence of tobacco smoking,
although, in many countries, air pollution resulting from the
burning of wood and other biomass fuels has also been
identiﬁed as a COPD risk factor. The prevalence and burden
of COPD are projected to increase in the coming decades due
to continued exposure to COPD risk factors and the changing
age structure of the world’s population.
Epidemiology
In the past, imprecise and variable deﬁnitions of COPD have
made it difﬁcult to quantify prevalence, morbidity, and mortal-
ity. Furthermore, the underrecognition and underdiagnosis of
COPD lead to signiﬁcant underreporting. The extent of the
underreporting varies across countries and depends on the level
of awareness and understanding of COPD among health
professionals, the organization of health care services to cope
with chronic diseases, and the availability of medications for the
treatment of COPD (14).
Prevalence. Many sources of variation can affect estimates of
COPD prevalence, including sampling methods, response rates,
quality control of spirometry, and whether spirometry is per-
formed pre- or post-bronchodilator. Despite these complexities,
data are emerging that enable some conclusions to be drawn
regarding COPD prevalence. A prevalence study in Latin
America (19), a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies
performed in 28 countries between 1990 and 2004 (15), and
an additional study from Japan (16) provide evidence that the
prevalence of COPD (stage I, mild COPD and higher) is
appreciably higher in smokers and ex-smokers compared with
nonsmokers, in those older than 40 years compared with those
younger than 40 years, and in men compared with women.
Morbidity. Morbidity measures traditionally include physi-
cian visits, emergency department visits, and hospitalizations.
Although COPD databases for these outcome parameters are
less readily available and usually less reliable than mortality
databases, the limited data available indicate that morbidity due
to COPD increases with age and is greater in men than in
women (17, 18). COPD in its early stages (stages I and II) is
usually not recognized, diagnosed, or treated, and therefore
may not be included as a diagnosis in a patient’s medical record.
Morbidity from COPD may be affected by other comorbid
chronic conditions (20) (e.g., musculoskeletal disease, diabetes
TABLE 2. SPIROMETRIC CLASSIFICATION OF CHRONIC
OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE SEVERITY BASED ON
POST-BRONCHODILATOR FEV1
Stage I: mild
FEV1/FVC , 0.70
FEV1 > 80% predicted
Stage II: moderate
FEV1/FVC , 0.70
50% < FEV1 , 80% predicted
Stage III: severe
FEV1/FVC , 0.70
30% < FEV1 , 50% predicted
Stage IV: very severe
FEV1/FVC , 0.70
FEV1 , 30% predicted or FEV1 , 50%
predicted plus chronic respiratory failure*
* Respiratory failure: arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) , 8.0 kPa
(60 mm Hg) with or without arterial partial pressure of CO2 (PaCO2) . 6.7 kPa
(50 mm Hg) while breathing air at sea level.
GOLD Executive Summary
535


--- Page 6 ---
mellitus) that are not directly related to COPD but nevertheless
may have an impact on the patient’s health status, or may in-
terfere with COPD management. In patients with more
advanced disease (stages III and IV), morbidity from COPD
may be misattributed to another comorbid condition.
Mortality. COPD is one of the most important causes of
death in most countries. The Global Burden of Disease Study
(2, 21, 22) has projected that COPD, which ranked sixth as the
cause of death in 1990, will become the third leading cause of
death worldwide by 2020. This increased mortality is driven by
the expanding epidemic of smoking and the changing demo-
graphics in most countries, with more of the population living
longer.
Economic and Social Burden of COPD
COPD is a costly disease. In developed countries, exacerbations
of COPD account for the greatest burden on the health care
system. In the European Union, the total direct costs of
respiratory disease are estimated to be about 6% of the total
health care budget, with COPD accounting for 56% (V38.6
billion) of this cost of respiratory disease (23). In the United
States in 2002, the direct costs of COPD were $18 billion and
the indirect costs totaled $14.1 billion (1). Costs per patient will
vary across countries because these costs depend on how health
care is provided and paid (24). Not surprisingly, there is
a striking direct relationship between the severity of COPD
and the cost of care (25), and the distribution of costs changes as
the disease progresses.
Risk Factors
Identiﬁcation of cigarette smoking as the most commonly
encountered risk factor for COPD has led to the incorporation
of smoking cessation programs as a key element of COPD
prevention, as well as an important intervention for patients
who already have the disease. However, although smoking is
the best-studied COPD risk factor, it is not the only one and
there is consistent evidence from epidemiologic studies that
nonsmokers may develop chronic airﬂow obstruction (26, 27)
(Figure 1).
Genes. As the understanding of the importance of risk
factors for COPD has grown, so has the recognition that
essentially all risk for COPD results from a gene–environment
interaction. The genetic risk factor that is best documented is
a severe hereditary deﬁciency of a1-antitrypsin (28), a major
circulating inhibitor of serine proteases. This rare recessive trait
is most commonly seen in individuals of northern European
origin (29).
Genetic association studies have implicated a variety of genes
in COPD pathogenesis. However, the results of these genetic
association studies have been largely inconsistent, and functional
genetic variants inﬂuencing the development of COPD (other
than a1-antitrypsin deﬁciency) have not been deﬁnitively identi-
ﬁed (30).
Inhalational exposures. TOBACCO SMOKE. Cigarette smokers
have a higher prevalence of respiratory symptoms and lung
function abnormalities, a greater annual rate of decline in
FEV1, and a greater COPD mortality rate than nonsmokers.
Pipe and cigar smokers have greater COPD morbidity and
mortality rates than nonsmokers, although their rates are lower
than those for cigarette smokers (31). Other types of tobacco
smoking popular in various countries are also risk factors for
COPD (32, 33). Not all smokers develop clinically signiﬁcant
COPD, which suggests that genetic factors must modify each
individual’s risk (34). Passive exposure to cigarette smoke may
also contribute to respiratory symptoms (35) and COPD (36) by
increasing the lungs’ total burden of inhaled particles and gases
(37, 38). Smoking during pregnancy may also pose a risk for the
fetus, by affecting lung growth and development in utero and
possibly the priming of the immune system (39, 40).
OCCUPATIONAL
DUSTS
AND
CHEMICALS. Occupational expo-
sures include organic and inorganic dusts and chemical agents
and fumes. A statement published by the American Thoracic
Society concluded that occupational exposures account for 10 to
20% of either symptoms or functional impairment consistent
with COPD (41).
INDOOR
AND
OUTDOOR
AIR
POLLUTION. The evidence that
indoor pollution from biomass cooking and heating in poorly
ventilated dwellings is an important risk factor for COPD
(especially among women in developing countries) continues
to grow (42–48), with case-control studies (47, 48) and other
designed studies now available. High levels of urban air
pollution are harmful to individuals with existing heart or lung
disease, but the role of outdoor air pollution in causing COPD is
unclear.
Sex. Studies from developed countries (1, 49) show that
the prevalence of the disease is now almost equal in men and
Figure 1.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease risk is
related to the total burden of inhaled particles.
536
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 7 ---
women, probably reﬂecting the changing patterns of tobacco
smoking. Some studies have suggested that women are more
susceptible to the effects of tobacco smoke than men (50–
52).
Infection. A history of severe childhood respiratory infec-
tion has been associated with reduced lung function and
increased respiratory symptoms in adulthood (53–55). How-
ever, susceptibility to viral infections may be related to
another factor, such as low birth weight, that itself is related
to COPD.
Socioeconomic status. There is evidence that the risk of
developing COPD is inversely related to socioeconomic status
(56). It is not clear, however, whether this pattern reﬂects
exposures to cigarette smoke, indoor and outdoor air pollutants,
crowding, poor nutrition, or other factors that are related to low
socioeconomic status (57, 58).
3. THE FOUR COMPONENTS OF COPD MANAGEMENT
Introduction
An effective COPD management plan includes four compo-
nents: (1) assess and monitor disease, (2) reduce risk factors, (3)
manage stable COPD, and (4) manage exacerbations. Although
disease prevention is the ultimate goal, once COPD has been
diagnosed, effective management should be aimed at the
following goals:
d Relieve symptoms
d Prevent disease progression
d Improve exercise tolerance
d Improve health status
d Prevent and treat complications
d Prevent and treat exacerbations
d Reduce mortality
These goals should be reached with minimal side effects from
treatment, a particular challenge in patients with COPD
because they commonly have comorbidities. The extent to
which these goals can be realized varies with each individual,
and some treatments will produce beneﬁts in more than one
area. In selecting a treatment plan, the beneﬁts and risks to
the individual, and the costs, direct and indirect, to the
individual, his or her family, and the community must be
considered.
Patients should be identiﬁed as early in the course of the
disease as possible, and certainly before the end stage of the
illness when disability is substantial. Access to spirometry is key
to the diagnosis of COPD and should be available to health care
workers who care for patients with COPD. However, the
beneﬁts of community-based spirometric screening, of either
the general population or smokers, are still unclear.
Educating patients, physicians, and the public to recognize
that cough, sputum production, and especially breathlessness
are not trivial symptoms is an essential aspect of the public
health care of this disease.
Reduction of therapy once symptom control has been achieved
is not normally possible in COPD. Further deterioration of lung
function usually requires the progressive introduction of more
treatments, both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic, to at-
tempt to limit the impact of these changes. Exacerbations of signs
and symptoms, a hallmark of COPD, impair patients’ quality of
life and decrease their health status. Appropriate treatment and
measures to prevent further exacerbations should be imple-
mented as quickly as possible.
Component 1: Assess and Monitor Disease
Initial diagnosis. A clinical diagnosis of COPD should be
considered in any patient who has dyspnea, chronic cough or
sputum production, and/or a history of exposure to risk factors
for the disease (Table 3). The diagnosis should be conﬁrmed by
spirometry.
ASSESSMENT OF SYMPTOMS. Dyspnea, the hallmark symptom
of COPD, is the reason most patients seek medical attention
and is a major cause of disability and anxiety associated with the
disease. As lung function deteriorates, breathlessness becomes
more intrusive. Chronic cough, often the ﬁrst symptom of
COPD to develop (59) and often predating the onset of dys-
pnea, may be intermittent, but later is present every day, often
throughout the day. In some cases, signiﬁcant airﬂow limitation
may develop without the presence of a cough. Patients with
COPD commonly raise small quantities of tenacious sputum
after coughing bouts. Wheezing and chest tightness are non-
speciﬁc symptoms that may vary between days, and over the
course of a single day. An absence of wheezing or chest tight-
ness does not exclude a diagnosis of COPD. Weight loss, an-
orexia, and psychiatric morbidity, especially symptoms of de-
pression and/or anxiety, are common problems in advanced
COPD (60, 61).
MEDICAL HISTORY. A detailed medical history of a new pa-
tient known or believed to have COPD should assess the
following:
d Exposure to risk factors
KEY POINTS
d A clinical diagnosis of COPD should be considered in
any patient who has dyspnea, chronic cough or sputum
production, and/or a history of exposure to risk factors
for the disease. The diagnosis should be conﬁrmed by
spirometry.
d For the diagnosis and assessment of COPD, spirometry
is the gold standard because it is the most reproducible,
standardized, and objective way of measuring airﬂow
limitation. A post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC , 0.70
conﬁrms the presence of airﬂow limitation that is not
fully reversible.
d Health care workers involved in the diagnosis and
management of patients with COPD should have access
to spirometry.
d Assessment of COPD severity is based on the patient’s
level of symptoms, the severity of the spirometric abnor-
mality, and the presence of complications.
d Measurement of arterial blood gas tensions should be
considered in all patients with FEV1 , 50% predicted or
clinical signs suggestive of respiratory failure or right
heart failure.
d COPD is usually a progressive disease and lung function
can be expected to worsen over time, even with the best
available care. Symptoms and objective measures of
airﬂow limitation should be monitored to determine
when to modify therapy and to identify any complica-
tions that may develop.
d Comorbidities are common in COPD and should be
actively identiﬁed. Comorbidities often complicate the
management of COPD, and vice versa.
GOLD Executive Summary
537


--- Page 8 ---
d Past medical history, including asthma, allergy, sinusitis, or
nasal polyps; respiratory infections in childhood; other
respiratory diseases
d Family history of COPD or other chronic respiratory
disease
d Pattern of symptom development
d History of exacerbations or previous hospitalizations for
respiratory disorder
d Presence of comorbidities, such as heart disease, malignan-
cies, osteoporosis, and muscloskeletal disorders, which may
also contribute to restriction of activity (62)
d Appropriateness of current medical treatments
d Impact of disease on patient’s life, including limitation of
activity, missed work and economic impact, effect on family
routines, feelings of depression or anxiety
d Social and family support available to the patient
d Possibilities for reducing risk factors, especially smoking
cessation
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION. Although an important part of pa-
tient care, a physical examination is rarely diagnostic in COPD.
Physical signs of airﬂow limitation are usually not present
until signiﬁcant impairment of lung function has occurred (63,
64), and their detection has a relatively low sensitivity and
speciﬁcity.
MEASUREMENT OF AIRFLOW LIMITATION (SPIROMETRY). Spirom-
etry should be undertaken in all patients who may have COPD.
Spirometry should measure the volume of air forcibly exhaled
from the point of maximal inspiration (FVC) and the volume of
air exhaled during the ﬁrst second of this maneuver (FEV1), and
the ratio of these two measurements (FEV1/FVC) should be
calculated. Spirometry measurements are evaluated by compar-
ison with reference values (65) based on age, height, sex, and
race (use appropriate reference values; e.g., see Reference 65).
Patients with COPD typically show a decrease in both FEV1
and FVC. The presence of airﬂow limitation is deﬁned by
a post-bronchodilator FEV1/FVC , 0.70. This approach is
pragmatic in view of the fact that universally applicable
reference values for FEV1 and FVC are not available. Where
possible, values should be compared with age-related normal
values to avoid overdiagnosis of COPD in the elderly (66).
Using the ﬁxed ratio (FEV1/FVC) is particularly problematic in
patients with milder COPD who are elderly because the normal
process of aging affects lung volumes.
ASSESSMENT
OF COPD
SEVERITY. Assessment of COPD
severity is based on the patient’s level of symptoms, the severity
of the spirometric abnormality (Table 2), and the presence of
complications such as respiratory failure, right heart failure,
weight loss, and arterial hypoxemia.
ADDITIONAL
INVESTIGATIONS. For patients diagnosed with
stage II, moderate, COPD and beyond, the following additional
investigations may be considered.
Bronchodilator reversibility testing. Despite earlier hopes,
neither bronchodilator nor oral glucocorticosteroid reversibility
testing predicts disease progression, whether judged by decline
in FEV1, deterioration of health status, or frequency of exac-
erbations (67, 68) in patients with a clinical diagnosis of COPD
and abnormal spirometry (68). In some cases (e.g., a patient
with an atypical history such as asthma in childhood and regular
night waking with cough or wheeze), a clinician may wish to
perform a bronchodilator and/or glucocorticosteroid reversibil-
ity test.
Chest X-ray. An abnormal chest X-ray is seldom diagnostic
in COPD unless obvious bullous disease is present, but it is
valuable in excluding alternative diagnoses and establishing
the presence of signiﬁcant comorbidities, such as cardiac
failure. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest is not
routinely recommended. However, when there is doubt about
the diagnosis of COPD, high-resolution CT scanning might
help in the differential diagnosis. In addition, if a surgical
procedure such as lung volume reduction is contemplated,
a chest CT scan is necessary because the distribution of
emphysema is one of the most important determinants of
surgical suitability (69).
Arterial blood gas measurement. In advanced COPD, mea-
surement of arterial blood gases while the patient is breathing
air is important. This test should be performed in stable patients
with FEV1 , 50% predicted or with clinical signs suggestive of
respiratory failure or right heart failure.
a1-Antitrypsin deﬁciency screening. In patients of Caucasian
descent who develop COPD at a young age (, 45 yr) or who
have a strong family history of the disease, it may be valuable to
identify coexisting a1-antitrypsin deﬁciency. This could lead to
family screening or appropriate counseling.
DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS. In some patients with chronic
asthma, a clear distinction from COPD is not possible using
current imaging and physiologic testing techniques, and it is
assumed that asthma and COPD coexist in these patients. In
these cases, current management is similar to that of asthma.
Other potential diagnoses are usually easier to distinguish from
COPD (Table 4).
Ongoing monitoring and assessment. MONITOR DISEASE PRO-
GRESSION AND DEVELOPMENT OF COMPLICATIONS. COPD is usually
a progressive disease. Lung function can be expected to worsen
over time, even with the best available care. Symptoms and
objective measures of airﬂow limitation should be monitored to
determine when to modify therapy and to identify any compli-
cations that may develop.
Follow-up visits should include a physical examination and
discussion of symptoms, particularly any new or worsening
symptoms. Spirometry should be performed if there is a sub-
stantial increase in symptoms or a complication. The develop-
ment of respiratory failure is indicated by a PaO2 , 8.0 kPa (60
mm Hg) with or without PaCO2 . 6.7 kPa (50 mm Hg) in arterial
blood gas measurements made while breathing air at sea level.
Measurement of pulmonary arterial pressure is not recommen-
ded in clinical practice as it does not add practical information
beyond that obtained from a knowledge of PaO2.
TABLE 3. KEY INDICATORS FOR CONSIDERING A DIAGNOSIS
OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
Consider COPD, and perform spirometry, if any of these indicators are
present in an individual. These indicators are not diagnostic themselves,
but the presence of multiple key indicators increases the probability
of a diagnosis of COPD. Spirometry is needed to establish a diagnosis of COPD.
Dyspnea that is
Progressive (worsens over time)
Usually worse with exercise
Persistent (present every day)
Described by the patient as an ‘‘increased
effort to breathe,’’ ‘‘heaviness,’’ ‘‘air hunger,’’
or ‘‘gasping
Chronic cough
May be intermittent and may be unproductive
Chronic sputum production
Any pattern of chronic sputum production
may indicate COPD
History of exposure
to risk factors, especially,
Tobacco smoke
Occupational dusts and chemicals
Smoke from home cooking and heating fuels
Deﬁnition of abbreviation: COPD 5 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
538
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 9 ---
MONITOR PHARMACOTHERAPY AND OTHER MEDICAL TREATMENT.
To adjust therapy appropriately as the disease progresses, each
follow-up visit should include a discussion of the current
therapeutic regimen. Dosages of various medications, adher-
ence to the regimen, inhaler technique, effectiveness of the
current regime at controlling symptoms, and side effects of
treatment should be monitored.
MONITOR EXACERBATION HISTORY. Frequency, severity, and
likely causes of exacerbations should be evaluated. Increased
sputum volume, acutely worsening dyspnea, and the presence of
purulent sputum should be noted. Severity can be estimated by
the increased need for bronchodilator medication or glucocor-
ticosteroids and by the need for antibiotic treatment. Hospital-
izations should be documented, including the facility, duration
of stay, and any use of critical care or intubation.
MONITOR
COMORBIDITIES. Comorbidities
are
common
in
COPD and may become harder to manage when COPD is
present, either because COPD adds to the total level of dis-
ability or because COPD therapy adversely affects the comor-
bid disorder. Until more integrated guidance about disease
management for speciﬁc comorbid problems becomes available,
the focus should be on identiﬁcation and management of these
individual problems.
Component 2: Reduce Risk Factors
Smoking prevention and cessation. Comprehensive tobacco
control policies and programs with clear, consistent, and re-
peated nonsmoking messages should be delivered through every
feasible channel, including health care providers, community
activities, and schools, and radio, television, and print media.
Legislation to establish smoke-free schools, public facilities, and
work environments should be developed and implemented by
government ofﬁcials and public health workers, and encouraged
by the public.
SMOKING CESSATION INTERVENTION PROCESS. Smoking cessa-
tion is the single most effective—and cost-effective—way to re-
duce exposure to COPD risk factors. All smokers—including
those who may be at risk for COPD as well as those who already
have the disease—should be offered the most intensive smoking
cessation intervention feasible. Even a brief (3 min) period of
counseling to urge a smoker to quit results in smoking cessation
rates of 5 to 10% (70). At the very least, this should be done for
every smoker at every health care provider visit (70, 71).
Guidelines for smoking cessation entitled ‘‘Treating Tobacco
Use and Dependence: A Clinical Practice Guideline’’ were
published by the U.S. Public Health Service (72) and recom-
mend a ﬁve-step program for intervention (Table 5), which
provides a strategic framework helpful to health care providers
interested in helping their patients stop smoking (72–75).
PHARMACOTHERAPY. Numerous effective pharmacotherapies
for smoking cessation now exist (72, 73, 76) (Evidence A), and
pharmacotherapy is recommended when counseling is not
sufﬁcient to help patients quit smoking. Numerous studies
indicate that nicotine replacement therapy in any form (nicotine
gum, inhaler, nasal spray, transdermal patch, sublingual tablet,
or lozenge) reliably increases long-term smoking abstinence
rates (72, 77).
The antidepressants bupropion (78) and nortriptyline have
also been shown to increase long-term quit rates (76, 77, 79), but
should always be used as one element in a supportive in-
tervention program rather than on their own. The effectiveness
of the antihypertensive drug clonidine is limited by side effects
(77). Varenicline, a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor partial
TABLE 4. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE
PULMONARY DISEASE
Diagnosis
Suggestive Features
COPD
Onset in midlife
Symptoms slowly progressive
Long history of tobacco smoking
Dyspnea during exercise
Largely irreversible airﬂow limitation
Asthma
Onset early in life (often childhood)
Symptoms vary from day to day
Symptoms at night/early morning
Allergy, rhinitis, and/or eczema also present
Family history of asthma
Largely reversible airﬂow limitation
Congestive heart failure
Nonspeciﬁc basilar crackles on auscultation
Chest X-ray shows dilated heart, pulmonary edema
Pulmonary function tests indicate volume
restriction, not airﬂow limitation
Bronchiectasis
Large volumes of purulent sputum
Commonly associated with bacterial infection
Coarse crackles/clubbing on auscultation
Chest X-ray/CT shows bronchial dilation,
bronchial wall thickening
Tuberculosis
Onset all ages
Chest X-ray shows lung inﬁltrate
Microbiological conﬁrmation
High local prevalence of tuberculosis
Obliterative bronchiolitis
Onset in younger age, nonsmokers
May have history of rheumatoid arthritis
or fume exposure
CT on expiration shows hypodense areas
Diffuse panbronchiolitis
Most patients are male and nonsmokers
Almost all have chronic sinusitis
Chest X-ray and HRCT show diffuse small
centrilobular nodular opacities and hyperinﬂation
Deﬁnition of abbreviations: COPD 5 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
CT 5 computed tomography; HRCT 5 high-resolution computed tomography.
These features tend to be characteristic of the respective diseases, but do not
occur in every case. For example, a person who has never smoked may develop
COPD (especially in the developing world where other risk factors may be more
important than cigarette smoking); asthma may develop in adult and even
elderly patients.
KEY POINTS
d Reduction of total personal exposure to tobacco smoke,
occupational dusts and chemicals, and indoor and out-
door air pollutants are important goals to prevent the
onset and progression of COPD.
d Smoking cessation is the single most effective—and cost-
effective—intervention in most people to reduce the risk of
developing COPD and stop its progression (Evidence A).
d Comprehensive tobacco control policies and programs
with clear, consistent, and repeated nonsmoking messages
should be delivered through every feasible channel.
d Efforts to reduce smoking through public health initia-
tives should also focus on passive smoking to minimize
risks for nonsmokers.
d Many occupationally induced respiratory disorders can
be reduced or controlled through a variety of strategies
aimed at reducing the burden of inhaled particles and
gases.
d Reducing the risk from indoor and outdoor air pollution
is feasible and requires a combination of public policy
and protective steps taken by individual patients.
GOLD Executive Summary
539


--- Page 10 ---
agonist that aids smoking cessation by relieving nicotine with-
drawal symptoms and reducing the rewarding properties of
nicotine, has been demonstrated to be safe and efﬁcacious (80–
82). Special consideration should be given before using phar-
macotherapy in the following selected populations: people with
medical contraindications, light smokers (,10 cigarettes/d), and
pregnant and adolescent smokers.
Occupational exposures. Although it is not known how many
individuals are at risk of developing respiratory disease from
occupational exposures in either developing or developed
countries, many occupationally induced respiratory disorders
can be reduced or controlled through a variety of strategies
aimed at reducing the burden of inhaled particles and gases
(83–85).
The main emphasis should be on primary prevention, which
is best achieved by the elimination or reduction of exposures to
various substances in the workplace. Secondary prevention,
achieved through surveillance and early case detection, is also
of great importance.
Indoor and outdoor air pollution. Individuals experience di-
verse indoor and outdoor environments throughout the day,
each of which has its own unique set of air contaminants and
particulates that cause adverse effects on lung function (86).
Although outdoor and indoor air pollution are generally
considered separately, the concept of total personal exposure
may be more relevant for COPD. Reducing the risk from
indoor and outdoor air pollution is feasible and requires
a combination of public policy and protective steps taken by
individual patients. At the national level, achieving a set level of
air quality standards should be a high priority; this goal will
normally require legislative action. Reduction of exposure to
smoke from biomass fuel, particularly among women and
children, is a crucial goal to reduce the prevalence of COPD
worldwide. Although efﬁcient nonpolluting cooking stoves have
been developed, their adoption has been slow due to social
customs and cost.
The health care provider should consider COPD risk factors,
including smoking history, family history, exposure to indoor/
outdoor pollution, and socioeconomic status, for each individual
patient. Those who are at high risk should avoid vigorous
exercise outdoors during pollution episodes. Persons with
advanced COPD should monitor public announcements of air
quality and be aware that staying indoors when air quality is
poor may help reduce their symptoms. If various solid fuels are
used for cooking and heating, adequate ventilation should be
encouraged. Under most circumstances, vigorous attempts
should be made to reduce exposure through reducing workplace
emissions and improving ventilation measures, rather than
simply using respiratory protection to reduce the risks of
ambient air pollution. Air cleaners have not been shown to
have health beneﬁts, whether directed at pollutants generated
by indoor sources or at those brought in with outdoor air.
Component 3: Manage Stable COPD
Introduction. The overall approach to managing stable COPD
should be characterized by an increase in treatment, depending
on the severity of the disease and the clinical status of the patient.
Management of COPD is based on an individualized assessment
of disease severity and response to various therapies. The clas-
siﬁcation of severity of stable COPD incorporates an individual-
ized assessment of disease severity and therapeutic response into
the management strategy. The severity of airﬂow limitation
provides a general guide to the use of some treatments, but the
TABLE 5. BRIEF STRATEGIES TO HELP THE PATIENT WHO IS
WILLING TO QUIT
1. ASK: Systematically identify all tobacco users at every visit.
Implement an ofﬁcewide system that ensures that, for EVERY patient at
EVERY clinic visit, tobacco use status is queried and documented.
2. ADVISE: Strongly urge all tobacco users to quit.
In a clear, strong, and personalized manner, urge every tobacco user to quit.
3. ASSESS: Determine willingness to make a quit attempt.
Ask every tobacco user if he or she is willing to make a quit attempt at this
time (e.g., within the next 30 d).
4. ASSIST: Aid the patient in quitting.
Help the patient with a quit plan; provide practical counseling; provide
intratreatment social support; help the patient obtain extratreatment
social support; recommend use of approved pharmacotherapy except
in special circumstances; provide supplementary materials.
5. ARRANGE: Schedule follow-up contact.
Schedule follow-up contact, either in person or via telephone.
Data from References 72–75.
KEY POINTS
d The overall approach to managing stable COPD should
be individualized to address symptoms and improve
quality of life.
d For patients with COPD, health education plays an
important role in smoking cessation (Evidence A) and
can also play a role in improving skills, ability to cope
with illness, and health status.
d None of the existing medications for COPD have been
shown to modify the long-term decline in lung function
that is the hallmark of this disease (Evidence A).
Therefore, pharmacotherapy for COPD is used to de-
crease symptoms and/or complications.
d Bronchodilator medications are central to the symptom-
atic management of COPD (Evidence A). They are
given on an as-needed basis or on a regular basis to
prevent or reduce symptoms and exacerbations.
d The principal bronchodilator treatments are b2-agonists,
anticholinergics, and methylxanthines used singly or in
combination (Evidence A).
d Regular treatment with long-acting bronchodilators is
more effective and convenient than treatment with
short-acting bronchodilators (Evidence A).
d The addition of regular treatment with inhaled glucocor-
ticosteroids to bronchodilator treatment is appropriate for
symptomatic patients with COPD with an FEV1 , 50%
predicted (stage III, severe COPD, and stage IV, very
severe COPD) and repeated exacerbations (Evidence A).
d Chronic treatment with systemic glucocorticosteroids
should be avoided because of an unfavorable beneﬁt-
to-risk ratio (Evidence A).
d In patients with COPD, inﬂuenza vaccines can reduce
serious illness (Evidence A). Pneumococcal polysaccha-
ride vaccine is recommended for patients with COPD
who are 65 years and older and for patients with COPD
who are younger than age 65 with an FEV1 , 40%
predicted (Evidence B).
d All patients with COPD beneﬁt from exercise training
programs, improving with respect to both exercise toler-
ance and symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue (Evidence A).
d The long-term administration of oxygen (. 15 h/d) to
patients with chronic respiratory failure has been shown
to increase survival (Evidence A).
540
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 11 ---
selection of therapy is predominantly determined by the patient’s
symptoms and clinical presentation. Treatment also depends on
the patient’s educational level and willingness to apply the
recommended management, on cultural and local practice con-
ditions, and on the availability of medications.
Education. Although patient education is generally regarded
as an essential component of care for any chronic disease, assess-
ment of the value of education in COPD may be difﬁcult because
of the relatively long time required to achieve improvements in
objective measurements of lung function. Patient education alone
does not improve exercise performance or lung function (87–90)
(Evidence B), but it can play a role in improving skills, ability to
cope with illness, and health status (91). Patient education re-
garding smoking cessation has the greatest capacity to inﬂuence
the natural history of COPD (Evidence A). Education also im-
proves patient response to exacerbations (92, 93) (Evidence B).
Prospective end-of-life discussions can lead to understanding of
advance directives and effective therapeutic decisions at the end
of life (94) (Evidence B).
Ideally, educational messages should be incorporated into all
aspects of care for COPD and may take place in many settings:
consultations with physicians or other health care workers,
home-care or outreach programs, and comprehensive pulmo-
nary rehabilitation programs. Education should be tailored to
the needs and environment of the individual patient, interactive,
directed at improving quality of life, simple to follow, practical,
and appropriate to the intellectual and social skills of the
patient and the caregivers. The topics that seem most appro-
priate for an education program include the following: smoking
cessation; basic information about COPD and pathophysiology
of the disease, general approach to therapy and speciﬁc aspects
of medical treatment, self-management skills, strategies to help
minimize dyspnea, advice about when to seek help, self-
management and decision making during exacerbations, and
advance directives and end-of-life issues.
Pharmacologic treatments. Pharmacologic therapy is used to
prevent and control symptoms (Figure 2), reduce the frequency
and severity of exacerbations, improve health status, and
improve exercise tolerance. None of the existing medications
(Table 6) for COPD have been shown to modify the long-term
decline in lung function that is the hallmark of this disease (51,
95–97) (Evidence A). However, this should not preclude efforts
to use medications to control symptoms.
BRONCHODILATORS. Bronchodilator medications are central
to the symptomatic management of COPD (98–101) (Evidence
A) (Table 7). They are given either on an as-needed basis for
relief of persistent or worsening symptoms or on a regular basis
to prevent or reduce symptoms. The side effects of bronchodi-
lator therapy are pharmacologically predictable and dose de-
pendent. Adverse effects are less likely, and resolve more rap-
idly after treatment withdrawal, with inhaled than with oral
treatment. When treatment is given by the inhaled route, atten-
tion to effective drug delivery and training in inhaler technique
are essential.
Bronchodilator drugs commonly used in treating COPD in-
clude b2-agonists, anticholinergics, and methylxanthines. The
choice depends on the availability of the medications and the
patient’s response. All categories of bronchodilators have been
shown to increase exercise capacity in COPD, without necessarily
producing signiﬁcant changes in FEV1 (102–105) (Evidence A).
Regular treatment with long-acting bronchodilators is more
effective and convenient than treatment with short-acting bron-
chodilators (106–109) (Evidence A). Regular use of a long-
acting b2-agonist (107) or a short- or long-acting anticholinergic
improves health status (106–108). Treatment with a long-acting
inhaled anticholinergic drug reduces the rate of COPD exacer-
bations (110) and improves the effectiveness of pulmonary re-
habilitation (111). Theophylline is effective in COPD, but, due
to its potential toxicity, inhaled bronchodilators are preferred
when available. All studies that have shown efﬁcacy of theoph-
ylline in COPD were done with slow-release preparations.
Combining bronchodilators with different mechanisms and
durations of action may increase the degree of bronchodilation
for equivalent or lesser side effects. A combination of a short-
acting b2-agonist and an anticholinergic produces greater and
more sustained improvements in FEV1 than either drug alone
and does not produce evidence of tachyphylaxis over 90 days of
treatment (112–114) (Evidence A).
Figure 2.
Therapy at each stage of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD). Post-bronchodilator FEV1 is rec-
ommended for the diagnosis and assess-
ment of severity of COPD.
GOLD Executive Summary
541


--- Page 12 ---
The combination of a b2-agonist, an anticholinergic, and/or
theophylline may produce additional improvements in lung
function (112–118) and health status (112, 119). Increasing the
number of drugs usually increases costs, and an equivalent
beneﬁt may occur by increasing the dose of one bronchodilator
when side effects are not a limiting factor. Detailed assessments
of this approach have not been performed.
Dose–response relationships using the FEV1 as the outcome
are relatively ﬂat with all classes of bronchodilators (98–101).
Toxicity is also dose related. Increasing the dose of either
a b2-agonist or an anticholinergic by an order of magnitude,
especially when given by a wet nebulizer, appears to provide
subjective beneﬁt in acute episodes (120) (Evidence B) but is
not necessarily helpful in stable disease (121) (Evidence C).
When treatment is given by the inhaled route, attention to
effective drug delivery and training in inhaler technique are
essential. The choice of inhaler device will depend on availabil-
ity, cost, the prescribing physician, and the skills and ability of
the patient. Patients with COPD may have more problems in ef-
fective coordination and ﬁnd it harder to use a simple metered-
dose inhaler than do healthy volunteers or younger patients
with asthma. It is essential to ensure that inhaler technique is
correct and to recheck this at each visit.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS. Regular
treatment
with
inhaled
glucocorticosteroids does not modify the long-term decline of
FEV1 in patients with COPD (95–97, 122). However, regular
treatment with inhaled glucocorticosteroids is appropriate for
symptomatic patients with COPD with an FEV1 , 50% pre-
dicted (stages III and IV) and repeated exacerbations (e.g.,
three in the last 3 yr) (123–126) (Evidence A). This treatment
has been shown to reduce the frequency of exacerbations and
thus improve health status (127) (Evidence A), and withdrawal
from treatment with inhaled glucocorticosteroids can lead to
exacerbations in some patients (128). Reanalysis of pooled
data from several longer studies of inhaled glucocorticoste-
roids in COPD suggests that this treatment reduces all-cause
mortality (129), but this conclusion requires conﬁrmation in pro-
spective studies before leading to a change in current treatment
TABLE 7. BRONCHODILATORS IN STABLE CHRONIC
OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
d Bronchodilator medications are central to symptom management in COPD.
d Inhaled therapy is preferred.
d The choice among b2-agonist, anticholinergic, theophylline, or
combination therapy depends on availability and individual response in
terms of symptom relief and side effects.
d Bronchodilators are prescribed on an as-needed or on a regular basis to
prevent or reduce symptoms.
d Long-acting inhaled bronchodilators are more effective and convenient.
d Combining bronchodilators may improve efﬁcacy and decrease the risk of
side effects compared to increasing the dose of a single bronchodilator.
Deﬁnition of abbreviation: COPD 5 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
TABLE 6. COMMONLY USED FORMULATIONS OF MEDICATIONS USED IN CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
Medication
Inhaler (mg)
Solution for
Nebulizer (mg/ml)
Oral
Vials for
Injection (mg)
Duration of
Action (h)
b2-Agonists
Short-acting
Fenoterol
100–200 (MDI)
1
0.5% (syrup)
4–6
Salbutamol (albuterol)
100, 200 (MDI and DPI)
5
5 mg (pill) 0.24% (syrup)
0.1, 0.5
4–6
Terbutaline
400, 500 (DPI)
0.2, 0.25
4–6
Long-acting
Formoterol
4.5–12 (MDI and DPI)
121
Salmeterol
25–50 (MDI and DPI)
121
Anticholinergics
Short-acting
Ipatropium bromide
20, 40 (MDI)
0.25-0.5
6–8
Oxitropium bromide
100 (MDI)
1.5
7–9
Long-acting
Tiotropium
18 (DPI)
241
Combination short-acting
b2-agonists
plus anticholinergic in
one inhaler
Fenoterol/ipratropium
200/80 (MDI)
1.25/0.5
6–8
Salbutamol/ipratropium
75/15 (MDI)
0.75/4.5
6–8
Methylxanthines
Aminophylline
200–600 mg (pill)
240
Variable, up to 24
Theophylline (SR)
100–600 mg (pill)
Variable, up to 24
Inhaled glucocorticosteroids
Beclomethasone
50–400 (MDI and DPI)
0.2-0.4
Budesonide
100, 200, 400 (DPI)
0.20, 0.25, 0.5
Fluticasone
50–500 (MDI and DPI)
Triamcinolone
100 (MDI)
40
40
Combination long-acting
b2-agonists plus
glucocorticosteroids
in one inhaler
Formoterol/budesonide
4.5/160, 9/320 (DPI)
Salmeterol/ﬂuticasone
50/100, 250, 500 (DPI) 25/50,
125, 250 (MDI)
Systemic glucocorticosteroids
Prednisone
5–60 mg (pill)
Methylprednisolone
4, 8, 16 mg (pill)
Deﬁnition of abbreviation: DPI 5 dry powder inhaler; MDI 5 metered-dose inhaler; SR 5 slow release.
542
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 13 ---
recommendations. An inhaled glucocorticosteroid combined with
a long-acting b2-agonist is more effective than the individual
components (123, 125, 126, 130, 131) (Evidence A). The dose–
response relationships and long-term safety of inhaled gluco-
corticosteroids in COPD are not known.
Long-term treatment with oral glucocorticosteroids is not
recommended in COPD (Evidence A). A side effect of long-
term treatment with systemic glucocorticosteroids is steroid
myopathy (132–134), which contributes to muscle weakness,
decreased functionality, and respiratory failure in subjects with
advanced COPD.
OTHER
PHARMACOLOGIC
TREATMENTS. Vaccines. Inﬂuenza
vaccines can reduce serious illness (135) and death in patients
with COPD by approximately 50% (136, 137) (Evidence A).
Vaccines containing killed or live, inactivated viruses are re-
commended (138) because they are more effective in elderly
patients with COPD (139). The strains are adjusted each year
for appropriate effectiveness and should be given once each
year (140). Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine is recommen-
ded for patients with COPD who are 65 years and older (141,
142). In addition, this vaccine has been shown to reduce the
incidence of community-acquired pneumonia in patients with
COPD who are younger than 65 years with an FEV1 , 40%
predicted (143) (Evidence B).
a1-Antitrypsin augmentation therapy. Young patients with
severe hereditary a1-antitrypsin deﬁciency and established
emphysema may be candidates for a1-antitrypsin augmentation
therapy. However, this therapy is very expensive, not available
in most countries, and not recommended for patients with COPD
that is unrelated to a1-antitrypsin deﬁciency (Evidence C).
Antibiotics. Prophylactic, continuous use of antibiotics has
been shown to have no effect on the frequency of exacerbations
in COPD (144–146), and a study that examined the efﬁcacy of
chemoprophylaxis undertaken in the winter months over a pe-
riod of 5 years concluded that there was no beneﬁt (147). There
is no current evidence that the use of antibiotics, other than for
treating infectious exacerbations of COPD and other bacterial
infections, is helpful (148, 149) (Evidence A).
Mucolytic (mucokinetic, mucoregulator) agents (ambroxol,
erdosteine, carbocysteine, iodinated glycerol). The regular use
of mucolytics in COPD has been evaluated in a number of long-
term studies with controversial results (150–152). Although
a few patients with viscous sputum may beneﬁt from mucolytics
(153, 154), the overall beneﬁts seem to be very small, and the
widespread use of these agents cannot be recommended at
present (Evidence D).
Antioxidant agents. Antioxidants, in particular N-acetylcys-
teine, have been reported in small studies to reduce the
frequency of exacerbations, leading to speculation that these
medications could have a role in the treatment of patients with
recurrent exacerbations (155–158) (Evidence B). However,
a large randomized controlled trial found no effect of N-
acetylcysteine on the frequency of exacerbations, except in
patients not treated with inhaled glucocorticosteroids (159).
Immunoregulators (immunostimulators, immunomodulators).
Studies using an immunoregulator in COPD show a decrease in
the severity and frequency of exacerbations (160, 161). How-
ever, additional studies to examine the long-term effects of this
therapy are required before its regular use can be recommended
(162).
Antitussives. Cough, although sometimes a troublesome
symptom in COPD, has a signiﬁcant protective role (163).
Thus, the regular use of antitussives is not recommended in
stable COPD (Evidence D).
Vasodilators. In patients with COPD, inhaled nitric oxide can
worsen gas exchange because of altered hypoxic regulation of
ventilation–perfusion balance (164, 165). Therefore, based on the
available evidence, nitric oxide is not indicated in stable COPD.
Narcotics (morphine). Oral and parenteral opioids are ef-
fective for treating dyspnea in patients with advanced COPD
disease. There are insufﬁcient data to conclude whether nebu-
lized opioids are effective (166). However, some clinical studies
suggest that morphine used to control dyspnea may have serious
adverse effects and its beneﬁts may be limited to a few sensitive
subjects (167–171).
Others. Nedocromil, leukotriene modiﬁers, and alternative
healing methods (e.g., herbal medicine, acupunture, homeopa-
thy) have not been adequately tested in patients with COPD
and thus cannot be recommended at this time.
Nonpharmacologic treatments. REHABILITATION. The princi-
pal goals of pulmonary rehabilitation are to reduce symptoms,
improve quality of life, and increase physical and emotional
participation in everyday activities. To accomplish these goals,
pulmonary rehabilitation covers a range of nonpulmonary prob-
lems that may not be adequately addressed by medical therapy
for COPD. Such problems, which especially affect patients with
stages II through IV COPD, include exercise deconditioning,
relative social isolation, altered mood states (especially de-
pression), muscle wasting, and weight loss.
Although more information is needed on criteria for patient
selection for pulmonary rehabilitation programs, patients with
COPD at all stages of disease appear to beneﬁt from exercise
training programs, improving with respect to both exercise
tolerance and symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue (172) (Evidence
A). Data suggest that these beneﬁts can be sustained even after
a single pulmonary rehabilitation program (173–175). Beneﬁt
does wane after a rehabilitation program ends, but if exercise
training is maintained at home, the patient’s health status remains
above pre-rehabilitation levels (Evidence B). To date, there is no
consensus on whether repeated rehabilitation courses enable
patients to sustain the beneﬁts gained through the initial course.
Beneﬁts have been reported from rehabilitation programs con-
ducted in inpatient, outpatient, and home settings (176–178).
Ideally, pulmonary rehabilitation should involve several
types of health professionals. The components of pulmonary re-
habilitation vary widely from program to program, but a com-
prehensive pulmonary rehabilitation program includes exercise
training, nutrition counseling, and education. Baseline and out-
come assessments of each participant in a pulmonary rehabil-
itation program should be made to quantify individual gains and
target areas for improvement. Assessments should include the
following:
d Detailed history and physical examination
d Measurement of spirometry before and after use of a bron-
chodilator drug
d Assessment of exercise capacity
d Measurement of health status and impact of breathlessness
d Assessment of inspiratory and expiratory muscle strength
and lower limb strength (e.g., quadriceps) in patients who
suffer from muscle wasting
The ﬁrst two assessments are important for establishing
entry suitability and baseline status but are not used in outcome
assessment. The last three assessments are baseline and out-
come measures.
OXYGEN THERAPY The long-term administration of oxygen
(. 15 h/d) to patients with chronic respiratory failure has been
shown to increase survival (179, 180). It can also have a bene-
ﬁcial impact on hemodynamics, hematologic characteristics,
exercise capacity, lung mechanics, and mental state (181).
GOLD Executive Summary
543


--- Page 14 ---
Long-term
oxygen
therapy
is
generally
introduced
in
patients with stage IV COPD, who have
d PaO2 at or below 7.3 kPa (55 mm Hg) or SaO2 at or below
88%, with or without hypercapnia (Evidence B), or
d PaO2 between 7.3 kPa (55 mm Hg) and 8.0 kPa (60 mm Hg),
or SaO2 of 88%, if there is evidence of pulmonary hyperten-
sion, peripheral edema suggesting congestive cardiac failure,
or polycythemia (hematocrit . 55%) (Evidence D).
The primary goal of oxygen therapy is to increase the
baseline PaO2 to at least 8.0 kPa (60 mm Hg) at sea level and
rest, and/or produce an SaO2 of at least 90%, which will preserve
vital organ function by ensuring adequate delivery of oxygen. A
decision about the use of long-term oxygen should be based on
the waking PaO2 values. The prescription should always include
the source of supplemental oxygen (gas or liquid), method of
delivery, duration of use, and ﬂow rate at rest, during exercise,
and during sleep.
VENTILATORY
SUPPORT. Although
long-term
noninvasive
positive-pressure ventilation (NIPPV) cannot be recommended
for the routine treatment of patients with chronic respiratory
failure due to COPD, the combination of NIPPV with long-term
oxygen therapy may be of some use in a selected subset of
patients, particularly in those with pronounced daytime hyper-
capnia (182).
SURGICAL
TREATMENTS. Bullectomy. In
carefully
selected
patients, this procedure is effective in reducing dyspnea and
improving lung function (183) (Evidence C). A thoracic CT
scan, arterial blood gas measurement, and comprehensive re-
spiratory function tests are essential before making a decision
regarding suitability for resection of a bulla.
Lung volume reduction surgery. A large multicenter study
of 1,200 patients comparing lung volume reduction surgery
with medical treatment has shown that after 4.3 years, patients
with upper lobe emphysema and low exercise capacity who
received the surgery had a greater survival rate than similar
patients who received medical therapy (54 vs. 39.7%) (184). In
addition, the surgery patients experienced greater improvements
in their maximal work capacity and their health-related quality of
life. The advantage of surgery over medical therapy was less
signiﬁcant among patients who had other emphysema distribution
or high exercise capacity before treatment. Although the results of
this study showed some very positive results of surgery in a select
group of patients (69, 184), lung volume reduction surgery is an
expensive palliative surgical procedure and can be recommended
only in carefully selected patients.
Lung transplantation. In appropriately selected patients with
very advanced COPD, lung transplantation has been shown to
improve quality of life and functional capacity (185–188)
(Evidence C). Criteria for referral for lung transplantation
include FEV1 , 35% predicted, PaO2 , 7.3–8.0 kPa (55–60
mm Hg), PaCO2 . 6.7 kPa (50 mm Hg), and secondary
pulmonary hypertension (189, 190).
Special considerations. SURGERY
IN COPD. Postoperative
pulmonary complications are as important and common as
postoperative cardiac complications and, consequently, are
a key component of the increased risk posed by surgery in
patients with COPD. The principal potential factors contribut-
ing to the risk include smoking, poor general health status, age,
obesity, and COPD severity. A comprehensive deﬁnition of
postoperative pulmonary complications should include only
major pulmonary respiratory complications, namely lung infec-
tions, atelectasis, and/or increased airﬂow obstruction, all
potentially resulting in acute respiratory failure and aggravation
of underlying COPD (191–196).
Component 4: Manage Exacerbations
Introduction. COPD is often associated with exacerbations
of symptoms (197–201). An exacerbation of COPD is deﬁned as
‘‘an event in the natural course of the disease characterized by
a change in the patient’s baseline dyspnea, cough, and/or
sputum that is beyond normal day-to-day variations, is acute
in onset, and may warrant a change in regular medication in
a patient with underlying COPD’’ (202, 203). Exacerbations are
categorized in terms of either clinical presentation (number of
symptoms [199]) and/or heath care resources utilization (202).
The impact of exacerbations is signiﬁcant and a patient’s
symptoms and lung function may both take several weeks to
recover to the baseline values (204).
The most common causes of an exacerbation are infection of
the tracheobronchial tree and air pollution (205), but the cause
of approximately one-third of severe exacerbations cannot be
identiﬁed. The role of bacterial infections is controversial, but
recent investigations have shown that at least 50% of patients
have bacteria in high concentrations in their lower airways
during exacerbations (206–208). Development of speciﬁc im-
mune responses to the infecting bacterial strains, and the
association of neutrophilic inﬂammation with bacterial exacer-
bations, also support the bacterial causation of a proportion of
exacerbations (209–212).
Diagnosis and assessment of severity. MEDICAL HISTORY. In-
creased breathlessness, the main symptom of an exacerbation, is
often accompanied by wheezing and chest tightness, increased
cough and sputum, change of the color and/or tenacity of
sputum, and fever. Exacerbations may also be accompanied
by a number of nonspeciﬁc complaints, such as tachycardia and
tachypnea, malaise, insomnia, sleepiness, fatigue, depression,
KEY POINTS
d An exacerbation of COPD is deﬁned as an event in the
natural course of the disease characterized by a change in
the patient’s baseline dyspnea, cough, and/or sputum that
is beyond normal day-to-day variations, is acute in onset,
and may warrant a change in regular medication in
a patient with underlying COPD.
d The most common causes of an exacerbation are in-
fection of the tracheobronchial tree and air pollution,
but the cause of about one-third of severe exacerbations
cannot be identiﬁed (Evidence B).
d Inhaled bronchodilators (particularly inhaled b2-agonists
with or without anticholinergics) and oral glucocorticos-
teroids are effective treatments for exacerbations of
COPD (Evidence A).
d Patients experiencing COPD exacerbations with clinical
signs of airway infection (e.g., increased sputum purulence)
may beneﬁt from antibiotic treatment (Evidence B).
d Noninvasive mechanical ventilation in exacerbations
improves respiratory acidosis, increases pH, decreases
the need for endotracheal intubation, and reduces PaCO2,
respiratory rate, severity of breathlessness, the length of
hospital stay, and mortality (Evidence A).
d Medications and education to help prevent future exac-
erbations should be considered as part of follow-up,
because exacerbations affect the quality of life and
prognosis of patients with COPD.
544
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 15 ---
and confusion. A decrease in exercise tolerance, fever, and/or
new radiologic anomalies suggestive of pulmonary disease may
herald a COPD exacerbation. An increase in sputum volume
and purulence points to a bacterial cause, as does prior history
of chronic sputum production (199, 212).
ASSESSMENT OF SEVERITY. Assessment of the severity of an
exacerbation is based on the patient’s medical history before the
exacerbation, preexisting comorbidities, symptoms, physical
examination, arterial blood gas measurements, and other labo-
ratory tests. Physicians should obtain the results of previous
evaluations, where possible, to compare with the current clinical
data. Speciﬁc information is required on the frequency and
severity of attacks of breathlessness and cough, sputum volume
and color, and limitation of daily activities. When available,
prior arterial blood gas measurements are extremely useful for
comparison with those made during the acute episode, as an
acute change in these tests is more important than their absolute
values. Thus, where possible, physicians should instruct their
patients to bring the summary of their last evaluation when they
come to the hospital with an exacerbation. In patients with stage
IV COPD, the most important sign of a severe exacerbation is
a change in the mental status of the patient and this signals
a need for immediate evaluation in the hospital.
Spirometry and PEF. Even simple spirometric tests can be
difﬁcult for a sick patient to perform properly. These measure-
ments are not accurate during an acute exacerbation; therefore,
their routine use is not recommended.
Pulse oximetry and arterial blood gas measurement. Pulse
oximetry can be used to evaluate a patient’s oxygen saturation
and need for supplemental oxygen therapy. For patients that
require hospitalization, measurement of arterial blood gases is
important to assess the severity of an exacerbation. A PaO2 ,
8.0 kPa (60 mm Hg) and/or SaO2 , 90% with or without PaCO2
. 6.7 kPa (50 mm Hg) when breathing room air indicate
respiratory failure. In addition, moderate to severe acidosis
(pH , 7.36) plus hypercapnia (PaCO2 . 6–8 kPa, 45–60 mm Hg)
in a patient with respiratory failure is an indication for
mechanical ventilation (196, 213).
Chest X-ray and ECG. Chest radiographs (posterior/ante-
rior plus lateral) are useful in identifying alternative diagnoses
that can mimic the symptoms of an exacerbation. An ECG aids
in the diagnosis of right heart hypertrophy, arrhythmias, and
ischemic episodes. Pulmonary embolism can be very difﬁcult to
distinguish
from
an
exacerbation,
especially
in
advanced
COPD, because right ventricular hypertrophy and large pulmo-
nary arteries lead to confusing ECG and radiographic results. A
low systolic blood pressure and an inability to increase the PaO2
above 8.0 kPa (60 mm Hg) despite high-ﬂow oxygen also
suggest pulmonary embolism. If there are strong indications
that pulmonary embolism has occurred, it is best to treat for this
together with the exacerbation.
Other laboratory tests. The complete blood count may iden-
tify polycythemia (hematocrit . 55%) or suggest bleeding.
White blood cell counts are usually not very informative. The
presence of purulent sputum during an exacerbation of symp-
toms is sufﬁcient indication for starting empirical antibiotic
treatment (33). Streptococcus pneumoniae, Hemophilus inﬂuen-
zae, and Moraxella catarrhalis are the most common bacterial
pathogens involved in COPD exacerbations. If an infectious
exacerbation does not respond to the initial antibiotic treatment,
a sputum culture and an antibiogram should be performed.
Biochemical test abnormalities can be associated with an
exacerbation and include electrolyte disturbance(s) (e.g., hypo-
natremia, hypokalemia), poor glucose control, or metabolic
acid–base disorder. These abnormalities can also be due to
associated comorbid conditions.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES. Patients with apparent exacerba-
tions of COPD who do not respond to treatment (204, 214)
should be reevaluated for other medical conditions that can
aggravate symptoms or mimic COPD exacerbations (153),
including pneumonia, congestive heart failure, pneumothorax,
pleural effusion, pulmonary embolism, and cardiac arrhythmia.
Noncompliance with the prescribed medication regimen can
also cause increased symptoms that may be confused with a true
exacerbation. Elevated serum levels of brain-type natriuretic
peptide, in conjunction with other clinical information, can
identify patients with acute dyspnea secondary to congestive
heart failure and enable them to be distinguished from patients
with COPD exacerbations (215, 216).
Home management. There is increasing interest in home care
for patients with end-stage COPD, although the exact criteria
for this approach as opposed to hospital treatment remain
uncertain and will vary by health care setting (217–220).
BRONCHODILATOR THERAPY. Home management of COPD
exacerbations involves increasing the dose and/or frequency of
existing short-acting bronchodilator therapy, preferably with
a b2-agonist (Evidence A). If not already used, an anticholin-
ergic can be added until the symptoms improve (Evidence D).
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS. Systemic glucocorticosteroids are
beneﬁcial in the management of exacerbations of COPD. They
shorten recovery time, improve lung function (FEV1) and
hypoxemia (PaO2) (221–224) (Evidence A), and may reduce
the risk of early relapse, treatment failure, and length of
hospital stay (225). They should be considered in addition to
bronchodilators if the patient’s baseline FEV1 is less than 50%
predicted. A dose of 30 to 40 mg prednisolone per day for 7 to
10 days is recommended (221, 222, 226).
ANTIBIOTICS. The use of antibiotics in the management of
COPD exacerbations is discussed below in HOSPITAL MANAGE-
MENT.
Hospital management. The risk of dying of an exacerbation
of COPD is closely related to the development of respiratory
acidosis, the presence of signiﬁcant comorbidities, and the need
for ventilatory support (227). Patients lacking these features are
not at high risk of dying, but those with severe underlying
COPD often require hospitalization in any case. Attempts at
managing such patients entirely in the community have met
with only limited success (228), but returning them to their
homes with increased social support and a supervised medical
care package after initial emergency room assessment has been
much more successful (229). Savings on inpatient expenditures
(230) offset the additional costs of maintaining a community-
based COPD nursing team. However, detailed cost–beneﬁt
analyses of these approaches are awaited.
A range of criteria to consider for hospital assessment/
admission for exacerbations of COPD are shown in Table 8.
Some patients need immediate admission to an intensive care
unit (ICU) (Table 9). Admission of patients with severe COPD
exacerbations to intermediate or special respiratory care units
may be appropriate if personnel, skills, and equipment exist to
identify and manage acute respiratory failure successfully.
The ﬁrst actions when a patient reaches the emergency
department are to provide supplemental oxygen therapy and
to determine whether the exacerbation is life threatening. If so,
the patient should be admitted to the ICU immediately. Other-
wise, the patient may be managed in the emergency department
or hospital (Table 10).
CONTROLLED OXYGEN THERAPY. Oxygen therapy is the cor-
nerstone of hospital treatment of COPD exacerbations. Sup-
plemental oxygen should be titrated to improve the patient’s
hypoxemia. Adequate levels of oxygenation (PaO2 . 8.0 kPa, 60
mm Hg, or SaO2 . 90%) are easy to achieve in uncomplicated
GOLD Executive Summary
545


--- Page 16 ---
exacerbations, but CO2 retention can occur insidiously with
little change in symptoms. Once oxygen is started, arterial blood
gases should be checked 30 to 60 minutes later to ensure
satisfactory oxygenation without CO2 retention or acidosis.
Venturi masks (high-ﬂow devices) offer more accurate delivery
of controlled oxygen than do nasal prongs but are less likely to
be tolerated by the patient (196).
BRONCHODILATOR THERAPY. Short-acting inhaled b2-agonists
are usually the preferred bronchodilators for treatment of
exacerbations of COPD (153, 196, 231) (Evidence A). If
a prompt response to these drugs does not occur, the addition
of an anticholinergic is recommended, even though evidence
concerning the effectiveness of this combination is controver-
sial. Despite its widespread clinical use, the role of methylxan-
thines in the treatment of exacerbations of COPD remains
controversial. Intravenous methylxanthines (theophylline or
aminohylline) are currently considered second-line therapy,
used when there is inadequate or insufﬁcient response to
short-acting bronchodilators (232–236) (Evidence B). Possible
beneﬁcial effects in terms of lung function and clinical end-
points are modest and inconsistent, whereas adverse effects are
signiﬁcantly increased (237, 238). There are no clinical studies
that have evaluated the use of inhaled long-acting bronchodi-
lators (either b2-agonists or anticholinergics) with or without
inhaled glucocorticosteroids during an acute exacerbation.
GLUCOCORTICOSTEROIDS. Oral or intravenous glucocorticos-
teroids are recommended as an addition to other therapies in
the hospital management of exacerbations of COPD (222, 223)
(Evidence A). The exact dose that should be recommended is
not known, but high doses are associated with a signiﬁcant risk
of side effects. Thirty to 40 mg of oral prednisolone daily for
7 to 10 days is effective and safe (Evidence C). Prolonged treat-
ment does not result in greater efﬁcacy and increases the risk of
side effects.
ANTIBIOTICS. On the basis of the current available evidence
(196, 62), antibiotics should be given to the following individuals:
d Patients with exacerbations of COPD with the following
three cardinal symptoms: increased dyspnea, increased spu-
tum volume, and increased sputum purulence (Evidence B)
d Patients with exacerbations of COPD with two of the
cardinal symptoms, if increased purulence of sputum is
one of the two symptoms (Evidence C)
d Patients with a severe exacerbation of COPD that requires
mechanical ventilation (invasive or noninvasive) (Evidence B)
The infectious agents in COPD exacerbations can be viral or
bacterial (140, 239). The predominant bacteria recovered from
the lower airways of patients with COPD exacerbations are H.
inﬂuenzae, S. pneumoniae, and M. catarrhalis (140, 206, 207, 240).
So-called atypical pathogens, such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae
and Chlamydia pneumoniae (240, 241), have been identiﬁed in
patients with COPD exacerbations, but because of diagnostic
limitations the true prevalence of these organisms is not known.
RESPIRATORY
STIMULANTS. Respiratory stimulants are not
recommended for acute respiratory failure (231). Doxapram,
a nonspeciﬁc but relatively safe respiratory stimulant available
in some countries as an intravenous formulation, should be used
only when noninvasive intermittent ventilation is not available
or not recommended (242).
VENTILATORY SUPPORT. The primary objectives of mechani-
cal ventilatory support in patients with COPD exacerbations are
to decrease mortality and morbidity and to relieve symptoms.
Ventilatory support includes both noninvasive intermittent
ventilation using either negative- or positive-pressure devices,
and invasive (conventional) mechanical ventilation by orotra-
cheal tube or tracheostomy.
Noninvasive mechanical ventilation. Noninvasive intermit-
tent ventilation (NIV) has been studied in several randomized
controlled trials in acute respiratory failure, consistently pro-
viding positive results, with success rates of 80 to 85% (182,
243–245). These studies provide evidence that NIV improves
respiratory acidosis (increases pH, and decreases PaCO2), and
decreases respiratory rate, severity of breathlessness, and length
of hospital stay (Evidence A). More importantly, mortality —or
TABLE 8. INDICATIONS FOR HOSPITAL ASSESSMENT OR
ADMISSION FOR EXACERBATIONS OF CHRONIC
OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE*
d Marked increase in intensity of symptoms, such as sudden development
of resting dyspnea, change in vital signs
d Severe underlying COPD
d Onset of new physical signs (e.g., cyanosis, peripheral edema)
d Failure of exacerbation to respond to initial medical management
d Signiﬁcant comorbidities
d Frequent exacerbations
d Newly occurring arrhythmias
d Diagnostic uncertainty
d Older age
d Insufﬁcient home support
Deﬁnition of abbreviation: COPD 5 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
* Local resources need to be considered.
TABLE 9. INDICATIONS FOR INTENSIVE CARE UNIT
ADMISSION OF PATIENTS WITH EXACERBATIONS
OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE*
d Severe dyspnea that responds inadequately to initial emergency therapy
d Changes in mental status (confusion, lethargy, coma)
d Persistent or worsening hypoxemia (PaO2 , 5.3 kPa, 40 mm Hg), and/or
severe/worsening hypercapnia (PaCO2 . 8.0 kPa, 60 mm Hg), and/or
severe/worsening respiratory acidosis (pH , 7.25) despite supplemental
oxygen and noninvasive ventilation
d Need for invasive mechanical ventilation
d Hemodynamic instability—need for vasopressors
* Local resources need to be considered.
TABLE 10. MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE BUT NOT
LIFE-THREATENING EXACERBATIONS OF CHRONIC
OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE IN THE EMERGENCY
DEPARTMENT OR THE HOSPITAL*
d Assess severity of symptoms, blood gases, chest X-ray
d Administer controlled oxygen therapy and repeat arterial blood gas
measurement after 30–60 min
d Bronchodilators:
– Increase doses and/or frequency
– Combine b2-agonists and anticholinergics
– Use spacers or air-driven nebulizers
– Consider adding intravenous methylxanthines, if needed
d Add oral or intravenous glucocorticosteroids
d Consider antibiotics (oral or occasionally intravenous) when there are
signs of bacterial infection
d Consider noninvasive mechanical ventilation
d At all times:
– Monitor ﬂuid balance and nutrition
– Consider subcutaneous heparin
– Identify and treat associated conditions (e.g., heart failure, arrhythmias)
– Closely monitor condition of the patient
Data from Reference 226.
* Local resources need to be considered.
546
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 17 ---
its surrogate, intubation rate—is reduced by this intervention
(245–248). However, NIV is not appropriate for all patients, as
summarized in Table 11 (182).
Invasive mechanical ventilation. The indications for initiat-
ing invasive mechanical ventilation during exacerbations of
COPD are shown in Table 12 and include failure of an initial
trial of NIV (252). As experience is being gained with the
generalized clinical use of NIV in COPD, several of the
indications for invasive mechanical ventilation are being suc-
cessfully treated with NIV.
The use of invasive ventilation in patients with end-stage
COPD is inﬂuenced by the likely reversibility of the precipitat-
ing event, the patient’s wishes, and the availability of intensive
care facilities. Major hazards include the risk of ventilator-
acquired pneumonia (especially when multiresistant organisms
are prevalent), barotrauma, and failure to wean to spontaneous
ventilation. Contrary to some opinions, acute mortality among
patients with COPD with respiratory failure is lower than
mortality among patients ventilated for non-COPD causes
(253). When possible, a clear statement of the patient’s own
treatment wishes—an advance directive or ‘‘living will’’—makes
these difﬁcult decisions much easier to resolve.
Weaning or discontinuation from mechanical ventilation can
be particularly difﬁcult and hazardous in patients with COPD
and the best method (pressure support or a T-piece trial)
remains a matter of debate (254–256). In patients with COPD
who fail weaning trials, noninvasive ventilation facilitates
extubation. It can also prevent reintubation in patients with
extubation failure and may reduce mortality.
OTHER MEASURES. Further treatments that can be used in the
hospital include the following: ﬂuid administration (accurate
monitoring of ﬂuid balance is essential); nutrition (supplemen-
tary when needed); deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis (me-
chanical devices, heparins, etc.) in immobilized, polycythemic,
or dehydrated patients with or without a history of thrombo-
embolic disease; and sputum clearance (by stimulating coughing
and low-volume forced expirations as in home management).
Manual or mechanical chest percussion and postural drainage
may be beneﬁcial in patients with excessive sputum production
or with lobar atelectasis.
Hospital discharge and follow-up. Insufﬁcient clinical data
exist to establish the optimal duration of hospitalization in
individual patients who develop an exacerbation of COPD (197,
257, 258). Consensus and limited data support the discharge
criteria listed in Table 13. Table 14 provides items to include in
a follow-up assessment 4 to 6 weeks after discharge from the
hospital. Thereafter, follow-up is the same as for patients with
stable COPD, including supervising smoking cessation, moni-
toring the effectiveness of each drug treatment, and monitoring
changes in spirometric parameters (229). Home visits by
a community nurse may permit earlier discharge of patients
hospitalized with an exacerbation of COPD, without increasing
readmission rates (153, 259–261).
In patients who are hypoxemic during a COPD exacerba-
tion, arterial blood gases and/or pulse oximetry should be
evaluated before hospital discharge and in the following 3
months. If the patient remains hypoxemic, long-term supple-
mental oxygen therapy may be required.
Opportunities for prevention of future exacerbations should
be reviewed before discharge, with particular attention to
smoking cessation, current vaccination (inﬂuenza, pneumococ-
cal vaccines), knowledge of current therapy including inhaler
technique (32, 262, 263), and how to recognize symptoms of
exacerbations. Pharmacotherapy known to reduce the number
of exacerbations and hospitalizations and delay the time of ﬁrst/
next hospitalization, such as long-acting inhaled bronchodilators,
inhaled glucocorticosteroids, and combination inhalers, should
be speciﬁcally considered. Social problems should be discussed
and principal caregivers identiﬁed if the patient has a signiﬁcant
persisting disability.
4. TRANSLATING GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS TO
THE CONTEXT OF (PRIMARY) CARE
TABLE 11. INDICATIONS AND RELATIVE CONTRAINDICATIONS
FOR NONINVASIVE INTERMITTENT VENTILATION
Selection criteria
d Moderate to severe dyspnea with use of accessory muscles and
paradoxical abdominal motion
d Moderate to severe acidosis (pH < 7.35) and/or hypercapnia
(PaCO2 . 6.0 kPa, 45 mm Hg) (251)
d Respiratory frequency . 25 breaths/min
Exclusion criteria (any may be present)
d Respiratory arrest
d Cardiovascular instability (hypotension, arrhythmias, myocardial infarction)
d Change in mental status; uncooperative patient
d High aspiration risk
d Viscous or copious secretions
d Recent facial or gastroesophageal surgery
d Craniofacial trauma
d Fixed nasopharyngeal abnormalities
d Burns
d Extreme obesity
Data from References 196, 243, 249, and 250.
TABLE 12. INDICATIONS FOR INVASIVE
MECHANICAL VENTILATION
d Unable to tolerate NIV or NIV failure (or exclusion criteria, see Table 11)
d Severe dyspnea with use of accessory muscles and paradoxical
abdominal motion
d Respiratory frequency . 35 breaths/min
d Life-threatening hypoxemia
d Severe acidosis (pH , 7.25) and/or hypercapnia (PaCO2 . 8.0 kPa, 60 mm Hg)
d Respiratory arrest
d Worsening in mental status despite optimal therapy
d Cardiovascular complications (hypotension, shock)
d Other complications (metabolic abnormalities, sepsis, pneumonia,
pulmonary embolism, barotrauma, massive pleural effusion)
Deﬁnition of abbreviation: NIV 5 noninvasive intermittent ventilation.
KEY POINTS
d There is considerable evidence that management of
COPD is generally not in accordance with current guide-
lines. Better dissemination of guidelines and their effec-
tive implementation in a variety of health care settings are
urgently required.
d In many countries, primary care practitioners treat the
vast majority of patients with COPD and may be actively
involved in public health campaigns and in bringing
messages about reducing exposure to risk factors to both
patients and the public.
d Spirometric conﬁrmation is a key component of the di-
agnosis of COPD and primary care practitioners should
have access to high-quality spirometry.
d Older patients frequently have multiple chronic health
conditions. Comorbidities can magnify the impact of
COPD on a patient’s health status, and can complicate
the management of COPD.
GOLD Executive Summary
547


--- Page 18 ---
The recommendations provided in sections 1 through 3
deﬁne—from a disease perspective—best practices in the di-
agnosis, monitoring, and treatment of COPD. However, (pri-
mary) medical care is based on an engagement with patients,
and this engagement determines the success or failure of
pursuing best practice. For this reason, medical practice
requires a translation of disease-speciﬁc recommendations to
the circumstances of individual patients—with regard to the
local communities in which they live, and the health systems
from which they receive medical care.
Diagnosis
In pursuing early diagnosis, a policy of identifying patients at
high risk of COPD, followed by watchful surveillance of these
patients, is advised.
Respiratory symptoms. Of the chronic symptoms character-
istic of COPD (dyspnea, cough, sputum production), dyspnea is
the symptom that interferes most with a patient’s daily life and
health status. When taking the medical history of the patient, it
is therefore important to explore the impact of dyspnea and
other symptoms on daily activities, work, and social activities,
and provide treatment accordingly.
Spirometry. High-quality spirometry in primary care is pos-
sible (264, 265), provided that good skills training and an
ongoing quality assurance program are provided. An alternative
is to ensure that high-quality spirometry is available in the
community—for example, within the primary care practice
itself, in a primary care laboratory, or in a hospital setting,
depending on the structure of the local health care system (266).
Ongoing collaboration between primary care and respiratory
care also helps assure quality control.
Comorbidities
Older patients frequently have multiple chronic health condi-
tions and the severity of comorbid conditions and their impact
on a patient’s health status will vary between patients and in the
same patient over time. Comorbidities for patients with COPD
may include the following: other smoking-related diseases, such
as ischemic heart disease and lung cancer; conditions that arise
as a complication of a speciﬁc preexisting disease, such as
pulmonary hypertension and consequent heart failure; coexist-
ing chronic conditions with unrelated pathogenesis related to
aging, such as bowel or prostate cancer, depression, diabetes
mellitus, Parkinson’s disease, dementia, and arthritis; or acute
illnesses that may have a more severe impact in patients with
a given chronic disease. For example, upper respiratory tract
infections are the most frequent health problem in all age
groups, but they may have a more severe impact or require
different treatment in patients with COPD.
Reducing Exposure to Risk Factors
Reduction of total personal exposure to tobacco smoke, occu-
pational dusts and chemicals, and indoor and outdoor air
pollutants, including smoke from cooking over biomass-fueled
ﬁres, is an important goal to prevent the onset and progression
of COPD. In many health care systems, primary care practi-
tioners may be actively involved in public health campaigns and
can play an important part in bringing messages about reducing
exposure to risk factors to patients and the public. Primary care
practitioners can also play a very important role in reinforcing
the dangers of passive smoking and the importance of imple-
menting smoke-free work environments.
Smoking cessation is the most effective intervention to
reduce the risk of developing COPD, and simple smoking
cessation advice from health care professionals has been shown
to make patients more likely to stop smoking. Primary care
practitioners often have many contacts with a patient over time,
which provides the opportunity to discuss smoking cessation,
enhance motivation for quitting, and identify the need for
supportive pharmacologic treatment. It is very important to
align the advice given by individual practitioners with public
health campaigns to send a coherent message to the public.
Implementation of COPD Guidelines
GOLD national leaders play an essential role in the dissemi-
nation of information about prevention, early diagnosis, and
management of COPD in health systems around the world. A
major GOLD program activity that has helped to bring together
health care teams at the local level is World COPD Day, held
annually on the third Wednesday in November.* GOLD na-
tional leaders, often in concert with local physicians, nurses, and
health care planners, have hosted many types of activities to
raise awareness of COPD. WONCA (the World Organization of
Family Doctors) is also an active collaborator in organizing World
COPD Day activities. Increased participation of a wide variety of
health care professionals in World COPD Day activities in many
countries would help to increase awareness of COPD.
GOLD is a partner organization in the World Health
Organization’s GARD with the goal to raise awareness of the
burden of chronic respiratory diseases in all countries of the
world, and to disseminate and implement recommendations
from international guidelines.
Although awareness and dissemination of guidelines are
important goals, the actual implementation of a comprehensive
care system in which to coordinate the management of COPD will
be important to pursue. Evidence is increasing that a chronic
disease management program for patients with COPD that
incorporates a variety of interventions, includes pulmonary re-
habilitation, and is implemented by primary care reduces hospital
admissions and bed days. Key elements are patient participation
and information sharing among health care providers (267).
*For further information on World COPD Day: http://www.goldcopd.org/WCDindex.
asp.
TABLE 13. DISCHARGE CRITERIA FOR PATIENTS WITH
EXACERBATIONS OF CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE
PULMONARY DISEASE
d Inhaled b2-agonist therapy is required no more frequently than every 4 h
d Patient, if previously ambulatory, is able to walk across room
d Patient is able to eat and sleep without frequent awakening by dyspnea
d Patient has been clinically stable for 12–24 h
d Arterial blood gases have been stable for 12–24 h
d Patient (or home caregiver) fully understands correct use of medications
d Follow-up and home care arrangements have been completed
(e.g., visiting nurse, oxygen delivery, meal provisions)
d Patient, family, and physician are conﬁdent patient can manage successfully
at home
TABLE 14. ITEMS TO ASSESS AT FOLLOW-UP VISIT 4–6 WEEKS
AFTER DISCHARGE FROM HOSPITAL FOR EXACERBATIONS OF
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY DISEASE
d Ability to cope in usual environment
d Measurement of FEV1
d Reassessment of inhaler technique
d Understanding of recommended treatment regimen
d Need for long-term oxygen therapy and/or home nebulizer (for patients
with stage IV, very severe COPD)
Deﬁnition of abbreviation: COPD 5 chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
548
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 19 ---
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: K.F.R. has consulted, participated in advisory board
meetings, and received lecture fees from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim (BI),
Chiesi Pharmaceuticals, Pﬁzer, Novartis, AltanaPharma, Merck, Sharp, and Dohme
(MSD), and GlaxoSmithKline (GSK). The Department of Pulmonology, and
thereby K.F.R. as head of the department, has received grants from AltanaPharma
($222,612), Novartis ($90,640), AstraZeneca ($113,155), Pﬁzer ($406,000), MSD
($118,000), Exhale Therapeutics ($90,000), BI ($90,000), Roche ($120,000), and
GSK ($299,495) in the years 2001 until 2006. S.H. does not have a ﬁnancial
relationship with a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject of this
manuscript. A.A. served as consultant in 2006 for Bayer Pharma ($2,000), Sanoﬁ
Aventis ($2,500), GSK ($2,000), BI ($2,000), and Sepracor ($3,000). He received
lecture fees from BI/Pﬁzer for $3,000, Bayer Pharma for $2,500, and for symposia
from BI for $1,500 and symposia from Kinetic Concepts, Inc. for $2,000. He also
received industry-sponsored grants from Bayer Pharma in 2004–2005 for $30,000,
C.R. Bard, Inc. for $60,000, BI for $50,000, NHLBI for $200,000, and GSK for
$200,000. P.J.B. has received research funding, lecture fees, and has served on
scientiﬁc advisory boards for GSK, AstraZeneca, BI, Novartis, AltanaPharma, and
Pﬁzer. S.A.B. has served on advisory boards for GSK, Altana, Schering Plough,
Merck, Novartis, Pﬁzer, and Sepracor. She has participated in COPD workshops
funded by AstraZeneca and GSK; and is Scientiﬁc Director for the Burden of
Obstructive Lung Disease (BOLD) initiative, which receives unrestricted educa-
tional grants to the Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research from GSK, Pﬁzer,
BI, AstraZeneca, AltanaPharma, Novartis, Merck, Chiesi, Schering Plough, and
Sepracor. P.C. has spoken at scientiﬁc meetings for which he received honoraria
(GSK, 2004—2006, $10,000; AstraZeneca, 2006, $3,000) and has served on
advisory boards (GSK, 2004–2006, $15,000; AstraZeneca, 2004, $2,500; Pﬁzer,
2005–2006, $5,000). He has received industry-sponsored grants from GSK
($110,000) and AltanaPharma ($40,000). Y.F. does not have a ﬁnancial relation-
ship with a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject of this manuscript.
C.J. has received fees for chairing or sitting on advisory boards of GSK,
AstraZeneca, and Pﬁzer/BI, for a total value of $22,000 in the last 3 years. C.J.
has also received fees for providing educational material and for giving lectures at
industry-sponsored symposia to the value of $8,500 in the last 3 years. C.J. is
a senior researcher in the Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, which
participates in clinical trials sponsored by GSK, AstraZeneca, AltanaPharma (now
NycoMed), and BI. The Institute is a member of a national collaborative research
group, which is cofunded by government and industry. The major industry
partners are GSK and Pharmaxis. R.R.-R. has participated as a lecturer and speaker
in scientiﬁc meetings and courses under the sponsorship of Almirall, AstraZeneca,
BI, GSK, Laboratorios Dr Esteve SA, and Pﬁzer; consulted with several pharmaceu-
tical companies with interests in the topics discussed in the present article (Almirall,
AltanaPharma, AstraZeneca, BI, GSK, Laboratorios Dr. Esteve SA, Novartis, Pﬁzer,
Viechi, and Zambon); serves on advisory boards for Almirall, BI, GSK, Novartis,
Pﬁzer, Proctor and Gamble, and Viechi; has been sponsored for several clinical
trials; and has received laboratory research support from AstraZeneca, BI, GSK,
Laboratorios Dr Esteve SA, Pﬁzer, and Proctor and Gamble Ltd. C.v.W. has received
speakers fees from Novartis, BI, AltanaPharma, and Pﬁzer, which have all been
made available to the World Organization of Family Doctors (WONES). His
department has received unrestricted research grants from GSK, BI, AstraZeneca,
Novartis, Novo Nordisk, and Bayer. J.Z. does not have a ﬁnancial relationship with
a commercial entity that has an interest in the subject of this manuscript.
References
1. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. 2004 NHLBI morbidity and
mortality chartbook on cardiovascular, lung and blood diseases [Internet].
Bethesda, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public
Health Service, National Institutes of Health [accessed 2007 Jul 26].
Available from: http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/resources/docs/cht-book.htm
2. Lopez AD, Shibuya K, Rao C, Mathers CD, Hansell AL, Held LS,
Schmid V, Buist S. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: current
burden and future projections. Eur Respir J 2006;27:397–412.
3. Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Global
strategy for diagnosis, management, and prevention of COPD [Inter-
net] [updated 2005]. Available from: http://www.goldcopd.org
4. Soriano JB, Visick GT, Muellerova H, Payvandi N, Hansell AL.
Patterns of comorbidities in newly diagnosed COPD and asthma in
primary care. Chest 2005;128:2099–2107.
5. Agusti AG. Systemic effects of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Proc Am Thorac Soc 2005;2:367–370.
6. Johannessen A, Lehmann S, Omenaas ER, Eide GE, Bakke PS,
Gulsvik A. Post-bronchodilator spirometry reference values in adults
and implications for disease management. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2006;173:1316–1325.
7. Fairall LR, Zwarenstein M, Bateman ED, Bachmann M, Lombard C,
Majara BP, Joubert G, English RG, Bheekie A, van Rensburg D,
et al. Effect of educational outreach to nurses on tuberculosis case
detection and primary care of respiratory illness: pragmatic cluster
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2005;331:750–754.
8. de Valliere S, Barker RD. Residual lung damage after completion of
treatment for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis
2004;8:767–771.
9. Bateman ED, Feldman C, O’Brien J, Plit M, Joubert JR. Guideline for
the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD):
2004 revision. S Afr Med J 2004;94:559–575.
10. Hogg JC. Pathophysiology of airﬂow limitation in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Lancet 2004;364:709–721.
11. Birring SS, Brightling CE, Bradding P, Entwisle JJ, Vara DD, Grigg J,
et al. Clinical, radiologic, and induced sputum features of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease in nonsmokers: a descriptive study.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:1078–1083.
12. Wouters EF, Creutzberg EC, Schols AM. Systemic effects in COPD.
Chest 2002;121:127S–130S.
13. Agusti AG, Noguera A, Sauleda J, Sala E, Pons J, Busquets X.
Systemic effects of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur
Respir J 2003;21:347–360.
14. Tirimanna PR, van Schayck CP, den Otter JJ, van Weel C, van
Herwaarden CL, van den Boom G, van Grunsven PM, van den
Bosch WJ. Prevalence of asthma and COPD in general practice in
1992: has it changed since 1977? Br J Gen Pract 1996;46:277–281.
15. Halbert RJ, Natoli JL, Gano A, Badamgarav E, Buist AS, Mannino
DM. Global burden of COPD: systematic review and meta-analysis.
Eur Respir J 2006;28:523–532.
16. Fukuchi Y, Nishimura M, Ichinose M, Adachi M, Nagai A, Kuriyama
T, Takahashi K, Nishimura K, Ishioka S, Aizawa H, et al. COPD in
Japan: the Nippon COPD Epidemiology study. Respirology 2004;9:
458–465.
17. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Morbidity and mortality:
chartbook on cardiovascular, lung, and blood Diseases. Bethesda,
MD: U.S. Department. of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service, National Institutes of Health; 1998.
18. Soriano JR, Maier WC, Egger P, Visick G, Thakrar B, Sykes J, Pride
NB. Recent trends in physician diagnosed COPD in women and men
in the UK. Thorax 2000;55:789–794.
19. Menezes AM, Perez-Padilla R, Jardim JR, Muino A, Lopez MV,
Valdivia G, Montes de Oca M, Talamo C, Hallal PC, Victora CG.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in ﬁve Latin American cities
(the PLATINO study): a prevalence study. Lancet 2005;366:1875–
1881.
20. Schellevis FG, Van de Lisdonk EH, Van der Velden J, Hoogbergen
SH, Van Eijk JT, Van Weel C. Consultation rates and incidence of
intercurrent morbidity among patients with chronic disease in general
practice. Br J Gen Pract 1994;44:259–262.
21. Murray CJL, Lopez AD, editors. The global burden of disease:
a comprehensive assessment of mortality and disability from diseases,
injuries and risk factors in 1990 and projected to 2020. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press; 1996.
22. Murray CJ, Lopez AD. Alternative projections of mortality and
disability by cause 1990–2020: Global Burden of Disease Study.
Lancet 1997;349:1498–1504.
23. European Respiratory Society. European lung white book. Hudders-
ﬁeld, UK: European Respiratory Society Journals; 2003.
24. Chapman KR, Mannino DM, Soriano JB, Vermeire PA, Buist AS,
Thun MJ, Connell C, Jemal A, Lee TA, Miravitlles M, et al.
Epidemiology and costs of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Eur Respir J 2006;27:188–207.
25. Jansson SA, Andersson F, Borg S, Ericsson A, Jonsson E, Lundback B.
Costs of COPD in Sweden according to disease severity. Chest
2002;122:1994–2002.
26. Celli BR, Halbert RJ, Nordyke RJ, Schan B. Airway obstruction in
never smokers: results from the Third National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey. Am J Med 2005;118:1364–1372.
27. Behrendt CE. Mild and moderate-to-severe COPD in non-smokers:
distinct demographic proﬁles. Chest 2005;128:1239–1244.
28. Stoller JK, Aboussouan LS. Alpha1-antitrypsin deﬁciency. Lancet
2005;365:2225–2236.
29. Blanco I, de Serres FJ, Fernandez-Bustillo E, Lara B, Miravitlles M.
Estimated numbers and prevalence of PI*S and PI*Z alleles of alpha1-
antitrypsin deﬁciency in European countries. Eur Respir J 2006;27:
77–84.
30. Silverman EK, Palmer LJ, Mosley JD, Barth M, Senter JM, Brown A,
Drazen JM, Kwiatkowski DJ, Chapman HA, Campbell EJ, et al.
Genomewide linkage analysis of quantitative spirometric phenotypes
in severe early-onset chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Hum Genet 2002;70:1229–1239.
31. U.S. Surgeon General. The health consequences of smoking: chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; 1984.
GOLD Executive Summary
549


--- Page 20 ---
32. Jindal SK, Aggarwal AN, Chaudhry K, Chhabra SK, D’Souza GA,
Gupta D, Katiyar SK, Kumar R, Shah B, Vijayan VK. A multicentric
study on epidemiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
its relationship with tobacco smoking and environmental tobacco
smoke exposure. Indian J Chest Dis Allied Sci 2006;48:23–29.
33. Al-Fayez SF, Salleh M, Ardawi M. Azahran FM. Effects of sheesha and
cigarette smoking on pulmonary function of Saudi males and females.
Trop Geogr Med 1988;40:115–123.
34. Smith CA, Harrison DJ. Association between polymorphism in gene
for microsomal epoxide hydrolase and susceptibility to emphysema.
Lancet 1997;350:630–633.
35. U.S. Surgeon General. The health consequences of involuntary expo-
sure to tobacco smoke. a report of the Surgeon General. Washington,
DC: Department of Health and Human Services; 2006.
36. Eisner MD, Balmes J, Katz BP, Trupin L, Yelin E, Blanc P. Lifetime
environmental tobacco smoke exposure and the risk of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Environ Health Perspect 2005;4:7–15.
37. Leuenberger P, Schwartz J, Ackermann-Liebrich U, Blaser K, Bolognini
G, Bongard JP, Brandli O, Braun P, Bron C, Brutsche M, et al.
Passive smoking exposure in adults and chronic respiratory symptoms
(SAPALDIA). Swiss Study on Air Pollution and Lung Diseases in
Adults, SAPALDIA Team. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994;150:
1222–1228.
38. Dayal HH, Khuder S, Sharrar R, Trieff N. Passive smoking in
obstructive respiratory disease in an industrialized urban population.
Environ Res 1994;65:161–171.
39. Tager IB, Ngo L, Hanrahan JP. Maternal smoking during pregnancy:
effects on lung function during the ﬁrst 18 months of life. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1995;152:977–983.
40. Holt PG. Immune and inﬂammatory function in cigarette smokers.
Thorax 1987;42:241–249.
41. Balmes J, Becklake M, Blanc P, Henneberger P, Kreiss K, Mapp C,
Milton D, Schwartz D, Toren K, Viegi G. American Thoracic Society
statement: occupational contribution to the burden of airway disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2003;167:787–797.
42. Warwick H, Doig A. Smoke the killer in the kitchen: indoor air
pollution in developing countries. London: ITDG Publishing; 2004.
43. Ezzati M. Indoor air pollution and health in developing countries.
Lancet 2005;366:104–106.
44. Smith KR, Mehta S, Maeusezahl-Feuz M. Indoor air-pollution from
household solid fuel use. In: Ezzati M., Lopez AD, Rodgers M.,
Murray CJ, editors. Comparative quantiﬁcation of health risks:
global and regional burden of disease attributable to selected
major risk factors. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organiza-
tion; 2004.
45. Mishra V, Dai X, Smith KR, Mika L. Maternal exposure to biomass
smoke and reduced birth weight in Zimbabwe. Ann Epidemiol
2004;14:740–747.
46. Boman C, Forsberg B, Sandstrom T. Shedding new light on wood
smoke: a risk factor for respiratory health. Eur Respir J 2006;27:446–
447.
47. Oroczo-Levi M. Garcia-Aymerich J, Villar J, Ramirez-Sarmiento A,
Anto JM, Gea J. Wood smoke exposure and risk of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 2006;27:542–546.
48. Sezer H, Akkurt I, Guler N, Marakoglu K, Berk S. A case-control study
on the effect of exposure to different substances on the development
of COPD. Ann Epidemiol 2006;16:59–62.
49. Mannino DM, Homa DM, Akinbami LJ, Ford ES, Redd SC. Chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease surveillance: United States, 1971–2000.
MMWR Surveill Summ 2002;51:1–16.
50. Xu X, Weiss ST, Rijcken B, Schouten JP. Smoking, changes in smoking
habits, and rate of decline in FEV1: new insight into gender differ-
ences. Eur Respir J 1994;7:1056–1061.
51. Anthonisen NR, Connett JE, Kiley JP, Altose MD, Bailey WC, Buist
AS, Conway WA Jr, Enright PL, Kanner RE, O’Hara P, et al. Effects
of smoking intervention and the use of an inhaled anticholinergic
bronchodilator on the rate of decline of FEV1. The Lung Health
Study. JAMA 1994;272:1497–1505.
52. Silverman EK, Weiss ST, Drazen JM, Chapman HA, Carey V,
Campbell EJ, Denish P, Silverman RA, Celedon JC, Reilly JJ, et al.
Gender-related differences in severe, early-onset chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;162:2152–
2158.
53. Tager IB, Segal MR, Speizer FE, Weiss ST. The natural history of
forced expiratory volumes: effect of cigarette smoking and respiratory
symptoms. Am Rev Respir Dis 1988;138:837–849.
54. Barker DJ, Godfrey KM, Fall C, Osmond C, Winter PD, Shaheen SO.
Relation of birth weight and childhood respiratory infection to adult
lung function and death from chronic obstructive airways disease.
BMJ 1991;303:671–675.
55. Shaheen SO, Barker DJ, Shiell AW, Crocker FJ, Wield GA, Holgate
ST. The relationship between pneumonia in early childhood and
impaired lung function in late adult life. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1994;149:616–619.
56. Prescott E, Lange P, Vestbo J. Socioeconomic status, lung function and
admission to hospital for COPD: results from the Copenhagen City
Heart Study. Eur Respir J 1999;13:1109–1114.
57. Tao X, Hong CJ, Yu S, Chen B, Zhu H, Yang M. Priority among air
pollution factors for preventing chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease in Shanghai. Sci Total Environ 1992;127:57–67.
58. U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Criteria for a recom-
mended standard: occupational exposure to respirable coal mine dust.
Atlanta, GA: National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health;
1995.
59. Georgopoulas D, Anthonisen NR. Symptoms and signs of COPD. In:
Cherniack NS, editor. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Tor-
onto, ON, Canada: W.B. Saunders; 1991. pp. 357–363.
60. Schols AM, Soeters PB, Dingemans AM, Mostert R, Frantzen PJ,
Wouters EF. Prevalence and characteristics of nutritional depletion in
patients with stable COPD eligible for pulmonary rehabilitation. Am
Rev Respir Dis 1993;147:1151–1156.
61. Calverley PMA. Neuropsychological deﬁcits in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease [editorial]. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis 1996;51:5–6.
62. Holguin F, Folch E, Redd SC, Mannino DM. Comorbidity and
mortality in COPD-related hospitalizations in the United States,
1979 to 2001. Chest 2005;128:2005–2011.
63. Kesten S, Chapman KR. Physician perceptions and management of
COPD. Chest 1993;104:254–258.
64. Loveridge B, West P, Kryger MH, Anthonisen NR. Alteration in
breathing pattern with progression of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Am Rev Respir Dis 1986;134:930–934.
65. Pellegrino R, Viegi G, Brusasco V, Crapo RO, Burgos F, Casaburi R,
Coates A, van der Grinten CP, Gustafsson P, Hankinson J,et al.
Interpretative strategies for lung function tests. Eur Respir J 2005;26:
948–968.
66. Hardie JA, Buist AS, Vollmer WM, Ellingsen I, Bakke PS, Morkve O.
Risk of over-diagnosis of COPD in asymptomatic elderly never-
smokers. Eur Respir J 2002;20:1117–1122.
67. Burge PS, Calverley PM, Jones PW, Spencer S, Anderson JA.
Prednisolone response in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: results from the ISOLDE study. Thorax 2003;58:654–658.
68. Calverley PM, Burge PS, Spencer S, Anderson JA, Jones PW.
Bronchodilator reversibility testing in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Thorax 2003;58:659–664.
69. Fishman A, Martinez F, Naunheim K, Piantadosi S, Wise R, Ries A,
Weinmann G, Wood DE. A randomized trial comparing lung-volume-
reduction surgery with medical therapy for severe emphysema.
N Engl J Med 2003;348:2059–2073.
70. Wilson DH, Wakeﬁeld MA, Steven ID, Rohrsheim RA, Esterman AJ,
Graham NM. ‘‘Sick of smoking’’: evaluation of a targeted minimal
smoking cessation intervention in general practice. Med J Aust 1990;
152:518–521.
71. Britton J, Knox A. Helping people to stop smoking: the new smoking
cessation guidelines. Thorax 1999;54:1–2.
72. Fiore MC, Bailey WC, Cohen SJ, Dorfman SF, Fox BJ, Goldstein MG,
Gritz E, Hasselblad V, Heyman RB, Jaen CR, et al.; The Tobacco Use
and Dependence Clinical Practice Guideline Panel, Staff, and Consor-
tium Representatives. A clinical practice guideline for treating tobacco
use and dependence: A US Public Health Service report. JAMA 2000;
28:3244–3254.
73. American Medical Association. Guidelines for the diagnosis and
treatment of nicotine dependence: how to help patients stop smoking.
Washington, DC: American Medical Association; 1994.
74. Glynn TJ, Manley MW. How to help your patients stop smoking:
a National Cancer Institute manual for physicians. Bethesda, MD:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health
Service, National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute; 1990.
75. Glynn TJ, Manley MW, Pechacek TF. Physician-initiated smoking
cessation program: the National Cancer Institute trials. Prog Clin Biol
Res 1990;339:11–25.
76. Fiore MC, Bailey WC, Cohen SJ. Smoking cessation: information for
specialists. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human
550
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 21 ---
Services, Public Health Service, Agency for Health Care Policy and
Research, and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 1996.
77. Lancaster T, Stead L, Silagy C, Sowden A. Effectiveness of interven-
tions to help people stop smoking: ﬁndings from the Cochrane
Library. BMJ 2000;321:355–358.
78. Tashkin D, Kanner R, Bailey W, Buist S, Anderson P, Nides M,
Gonzales D, Dozier G, Patel MK, Jamerson B. Smoking cessation in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomised trial. Lancet 2001;357:1571–1575.
79. Jorenby DE, Leischow SJ, Nides MA, Rennard SI, Johnston JA,
Hughes AR, Smith SS, Muramoto ML, Daughton DM, Doan K,
et al. A controlled trial of sustained-release bupropion, a nicotine
patch, or both for smoking cessation. N Engl J Med 1999;340:685–691.
80. Jorenby DE, Hays JT, Rigotti NA, Axoulay S, Watsky EJ, Williams
KE, Billing CB, Gong J, Reeves KR; Varenicline Phase 3 Study
Group. Efﬁcacy of varenicline, an alpha4beta2 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor partial agonist, vs placebo or sustained-release bupropion for
smoking cessation: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2006;296:56–
63.
81. Nides M, Oncken C, Gonzales D, Rennard S, Watsky EJ, Anziano R,
Reeves KR. Smoking cessation with varenicline, a selective alpha4-
beta2 nicotinic receptor partial agonist: results from a 7-week, random-
ized, placebo- and bupropion-controlled trial with 1-year follow-up.
Arch Intern Med 2006;166:1561–1568.
82. Tonstad S, Tonnesen P, Hajek P, Williams KE, Billing CB, Reeves KR,
Varenicline Phase 3 Study Group. Effect of maintenance therapy with
varenicline on smoking cessation: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2006;296:64–71.
83. Chapman RS, Xingzhou H, Blair AE, Lan Q. Improvement in
household stoves and risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
in Xuanwei, China: retrospective cohort study. BMJ 2005;331:1050.
84. Ghambarian MH, Feenstra TL, Zwanikken P, Kalinina AM. Can
prevention be improved? Proposal for an integrated intervention
strategy. Prev Med 2004;39:337–343.
85. Nichter M. Introducing tobacco cessation in developing countries: an
overview of Quit Tobacco International. Tob Control 2006;15:12–17.
86. Ackermann-Liebrich U, Leuenberger P, Schwartz J, Schindler C, Monn
C, Bolognini G, Bongard JP, Bra¨ndli O, Domenighetti G. Elsasser S,
et al. Lung function and long term exposure to air pollutants in
Switzerland. Study on Air Pollution and Lung Diseases in Adults
(SAPALDIA) team. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1997;155:122–129.
87. Reis AL. Response to bronchodilators. In: Clausen J, editor. Pulmo-
nary function testing: guidelines and controversies. New York:
Academic Press; 1982.
88. Janelli LM, Scherer YK, Schmieder LE. Can a pulmonary health
teaching program alter patients’ ability to cope with COPD? Rehabil
Nurs 1991;16:199–202.
89. Ashikaga T, Vacek PM, Lewis SO. Evaluation of a community-based
education program for individuals with chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease. J Rehabil 1980;46:23–27.
90. Toshima MT, Kaplan RM, Ries AL. Experimental evaluation of
rehabilitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: short-term
effects on exercise endurance and health status. Health Psychol
1990;9:237–252.
91. Celli BR. Pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with COPD. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:861–864.
92. Stewart MA. Effective physician-patient communication and health
outcomes: a review. CMAJ 1995;152:1423–1433.
93. Clark NM, Nothwehr F, Gong M, Evans D, Maiman LA, Hurwitz ME,
Roloff D, Mellins RD. Physician-patient partnership in managing
chronic illness. Acad Med 1995;70:957–959.
94. Heffner JE, Fahy B, Hilling L, Barbieri C. Outcomes of advance
directive education of pulmonary rehabilitation patients. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1997;155:1055–1059.
95. Pauwels RA, Lofdahl CG, Laitinen LA, Schouten JP, Postma DS,
Pride NB, Ohlsson SV. Long-term treatment with inhaled budesonide
in persons with mild chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who
continue smoking. European Respiratory Society Study on Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1948–
1953.
96. Vestbo J, Sorensen T, Lange P, Brix A, Torre P, Viskum K. Long-term
effect of inhaled budesonide in mild and moderate chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 1999;
353:1819–1823.
97. Burge PS, Calverley PM, Jones PW, Spencer S, Anderson JA, Maslen
TK. Randomised, double blind, placebo controlled study of ﬂutica-
sone propionate in patients with moderate to severe chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease: the ISOLDE trial. BMJ 2000;320:1297–1303.
98. Vathenen AS, Britton JR, Ebden P, Cookson JB, Wharrad HJ,
Tattersﬁeld AE. High-dose inhaled albuterol in severe chronic airﬂow
limitation. Am Rev Respir Dis 1988;138:850–855.
99. Gross NJ, Petty TL, Friedman M, Skorodin MS, Silvers GW, Donohue
JF. Dose response to ipratropium as a nebulized solution in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a three-center study. Am
Rev Respir Dis 1989;139:1188–1191.
100. Chrystyn H, Mulley BA, Peake MD. Dose response relation to oral
theophylline in severe chronic obstructive airways disease. BMJ
1988;297:1506–1510.
101. Higgins BG, Powell RM, Cooper S, Tattersﬁeld AE. Effect of salbutamol
and ipratropium bromide on airway calibre and bronchial reactivity in
asthma and chronic bronchitis. Eur Respir J 1991;4:415–420.
102. Ikeda A, Nishimura K, Koyama H, Izumi T. Bronchodilating effects of
combined therapy with clinical dosages of ipratropium bromide and
salbutamol for stable COPD: comparison with ipratropium bromide
alone. Chest 1995;107:401–405.
103. Guyatt GH, Townsend M, Pugsley SO, Keller JL, Short HD, Taylor
DW, Newhouse MT. Bronchodilators in chronic air-ﬂow limitation:
effects on airway function, exercise capacity, and quality of life. Am
Rev Respir Dis 1987;135:1069–1074.
104. Man WD, Mustfa N, Nikoletou D, Kaul S, Hart N, Rafferty GF,
Donaldson N, Polkey MI, Moxham J. Effect of salmeterol on
respiratory muscle activity during exercise in poorly reversible
COPD. Thorax 2004;59:471–476.
105. O’Donnell DE, Fluge T, Gerken F, Hamilton A, Webb K, Aguilaniu B,
Make B, Magnussen H. Effects of tiotropium on lung hyperinﬂation,
dyspnoea and exercise tolerance in COPD. Eur Respir J 2004;23:832–
840.
106. Vincken W, van Noord JA, Greefhorst AP, Bantje TA, Kesten S,
Korducki L, Cornelissen PJ. Improved health outcomes in patients
with COPD during 1 yr’s treatment with tiotropium. Eur Respir J
2002;19:209–216.
107. Mahler DA, Donohue JF, Barbee RA, Goldman MD, Gross NJ,
Wisniewski ME, Yancey SW, Zakes BA, Rickard KA, Anderson
WH. Efﬁcacy of salmeterol xinafoate in the treatment of COPD.
Chest 1999;115:957–965.
108. Dahl R, Greefhorst LA, Nowak D, Nonikov V, Byrne AM, Thomson
MH, Till D, Della Cioppa G. Inhaled formoterol dry powder versus
ipratropium bromide in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2001;164:778–784.
109. Oostenbrink JB, Rutten-van Molken MP, Al MJ, Van Noord JA,
Vincken W. One-year cost-effectiveness of tiotropium versus ipra-
tropium to treat chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J
2004;23:241–249.
110. Niewoehner DE, Rice K, Cote C, Paulson D, Cooper JA Jr, Korducki
L, Cassino C, Kesten S. Prevention of exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease with tiotropium, a once-daily inhaled
anticholinergic bronchodilator: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med
2005;143:317–326.
111. Casaburi R, Kukafka D, Cooper CB, Witek TJ Jr, Kesten S. Improve-
ment in exercise tolerance with the combination of tiotropium and
pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with COPD. Chest 2005;127:809–
817.
112. COMBIVENT Inhalation Aerosol Study Group. In chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, a combination of ipratropium and albuterol is
more effective than either agent alone: an 85-day multicenter trial.
Chest 1994;105:1411–1419.
113. COMBIVENT Inhalation Solution Study Group. Routine nebulized
ipratropium and albuterol together are better than either alone in
COPD. Chest 1997;112:1514–1521.
114. Gross N, Tashkin D, Miller R, Oren J, Coleman W, Linberg S.
Inhalation by nebulization of albuterol-ipratropium combination
(Dey combination) is superior to either agent alone in the treatment
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Dey Combination Solution
Study Group. Respiration (Herrlisheim) 1998;65:354–362.
115. Taylor DR, Buick B, Kinney C, Lowry RC, McDevitt DG. The efﬁcacy
of orally administered theophylline, inhaled salbutamol, and a combi-
nation of the two as chronic therapy in the management of chronic
bronchitis with reversible air-ﬂow obstruction. Am Rev Respir Dis
1985;131:747–751.
116. van Noord JA, de Munck DR, Bantje TA, Hop WC, Akveld ML,
Bommer AM. Long-term treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
GOLD Executive Summary
551


--- Page 22 ---
disease with salmeterol and the additive effect of ipratropium. Eur
Respir J 2000;15:878–885.
117. ZuWallack RL, Mahler DA, Reilly D, Church N, Emmett A, Rickard
K, Knobil K. Salmeterol plus theophylline combination therapy in the
treatment of COPD. Chest 2001;119:1661–1670.
118. Bellia V, Foresi A, Bianco S, Grassi V, Olivieri D, Bensi G, Volonte M.
Efﬁcacy and safety of oxitropium bromide, theophylline and their
combination in COPD patients: a double-blind, randomized, multi-
centre study (BREATH trial). Respir Med 2002;96:881–889.
119. Guyatt GH, Berman LB, Townsend M, Pugsley SO, Chambers LW. A
measure of quality of life for clinical trials in chronic lung disease.
Thorax 1987;42:773–778.
120. O’Driscoll BR, Kay EA, Taylor RJ, Weatherby H, Chetty MC,
Bernstein A. A long-term prospective assessment of home nebulizer
treatment. Respir Med 1992;86:317–325.
121. Jenkins SC, Heaton RW, Fulton TJ, Moxham J. Comparison of domicil-
iary nebulized salbutamol and salbutamol from a metered-dose inhaler
in stable chronic airﬂow limitation. Chest 1987;91:804–807.
122. The Lung Health Study Research Group. Effect of inhaled triamcin-
olone on the decline in pulmonary function in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: Lung Health Study II. N Engl J Med 2000;
343:1902–1909.
123. Mahler DA, Wire P, Horstman D, Chang CN, Yates J, Fischer T, Shah
T. Effectiveness of ﬂuticasone propionate and salmeterol combina-
tion delivered via the Diskus device in the treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:
1084–1091.
124. Jones PW, Willits LR, Burge PS, Calverley PM. Disease severity and
the effect of ﬂuticasone propionate on chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease exacerbations. Eur Respir J 2003;21:68–73.
125. Calverley P, Pauwels R, Vestbo J, Jones P, Pride N, Gulsvik A,
Anderson J, Maden C. Combined salmeterol and ﬂuticasone in the
treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2003;361:449–456.
126. Szafranski W, Cukier A, Ramirez A, Menga G, Sansores R, Nahabedian
S, Peterson S, Olsson H. Efﬁcacy and safety of budesonide/formoterol
in the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur
Respir J 2003;21:74–81.
127. Spencer S, Calverley PM, Burge PS, Jones PW. Impact of preventing
exacerbations on deterioration of health status in COPD. Eur Respir J
2004;23:698–702.
128. van der Valk P, Monninkhof E, van der Palen J, Zielhuis G, van
Herwaarden C. Effect of discontinuation of inhaled corticosteroids in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the COPE study.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:1358–1363.
129. Sin DD, Wu L, Anderson JA, Anthonisen NR, Buist AS, Burge PS,
Calverley PM, Connett JE, Lindmark B, Pauwels RA, et al. Inhaled
corticosteroids and mortality in chronic obstructive pulmonary dis-
ease. Thorax 2005;60:992–997.
130. Hanania NA, Darken P, Horstman D, Reisner C, Lee B, Davis S, Shah
T. The efﬁcacy and safety of ﬂuticasone propionate (250 microg)/
salmeterol (50 microg) combined in the Diskus inhaler for the
treatment of COPD. Chest 2003;124:834–843.
131. Calverley PM, Boonsawat W, Cseke Z, Zhong N, Peterson S, Olsson H.
Maintenance therapy with budesonide and formoterol in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J 2003;22:912–919.
132. Decramer M, de Bock V, Dom R. Functional and histologic picture of
steroid-induced myopathy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;153:1958–1964.
133. Decramer M, Lacquet LM, Fagard R, Rogiers P. Corticosteroids
contribute to muscle weakness in chronic airﬂow obstruction. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1994;150:11–16.
134. Decramer M, Stas KJ. Corticosteroid-induced myopathy involving
respiratory muscles in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease or asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;146:800–802.
135. Wongsurakiat P, Maranetra KN, Wasi C, Kositanont U, Dejsomritrutai
W, Charoenratanakul S. Acute respiratory illness in patients with
COPD and the effectiveness of inﬂuenza vaccination: a randomized
controlled study. Chest 2004;125:2011–2020.
136. Nichol KL, Margolis KL, Wuorenma J, Von Sternberg T. The efﬁcacy
and cost effectiveness of vaccination against inﬂuenza among elderly
persons living in the community. N Engl J Med 1994;331:778–784.
137. Wongsurakiat P, Lertakyamanee J, Maranetra KN, Jongriratanakul S,
Sangkaew S. Economic evaluation of inﬂuenza vaccination in Thai
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients. J Med Assoc Thai
2003;86:497–508.
138. Edwards KM, Dupont WD, Westrich MK, Plummer WD Jr, Palmer PS,
Wright PF. A randomized controlled trial of cold-adapted and
inactivated vaccines for the prevention of inﬂuenza A disease.
J Infect Dis 1994;169:68–76.
139. Hak E, van Essen GA, Buskens E, Stalman W, de Melker RA. Is
immunising all patients with chronic lung disease in the community
against inﬂuenza cost effective? Evidence from a general practice
based clinical prospective cohort study in Utrecht, The Netherlands.
J Epidemiol Community Health 1998;52:120–125.
140. Woodhead M, Blasi F, Ewig S, Huchon G, Ieven M, Ortqvist A.
Schaberg T, Torres A, van der Heijden G, Verheij TJ. Guidelines for
the management of adult lower respiratory tract infections. Eur
Respir J 2005;26:1138–1180.
141. Jackson LA, Neuzil KM, Yu O, Benson P, Barlow WE, Adams AL,
Hanson CA, Mahoney LD, Shay DK, Thompson WW. Effectiveness
of pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine in older adults. N Engl J
Med 2003;348:1747–1755.
142. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Prevention of pneu-
mococcal disease: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
Immunization Practices (ACIP) [Internet]. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 1997;46(RR-08):1–24. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/00047135.htm.
143. Alfageme I, Vazaque R, Reyes N, Munoz J, Fernandez A, Hernandez
M, Merino M, Perez J, Lima J. Clinical efﬁciacy of anti-pneumococcal
vaccination in patients with COPD. Thorax 2006;61:189–195.
144. Francis RS, May JR, Spicer CC. Chemotherapy of bronchitis: inﬂuence
of penicillin and tetracycline administered daily, or intermittently for
exacerbations. BMJ 1961;2:979–985.
145. Francis RS, Spicer CC. Chemotherapy in chronic bronchitis: inﬂuence of
daily penicillin and teracycline on exacerbations and their cost: a report
to the research committee of the British Tuberculosis Association by
their Chronic Bronchitis subcommittee. BMJ 1960;1:297–303.
146. Medical Research Council. Value of chemoprophylaxis and chemo-
therapy in early chronic bronchitis: a report to the Medical Research
Council by their Working Party on trials of chemotherapy in early
chronic bronchitis. BMJ 1966;1(5499):1317–1322.
147. Johnston RN, McNeill RS, Smith DH, Dempster MB, Nairn JR, Purvis
MS, Watson JM, Ward FG. Five-year winter chemoprophylaxis for
chronic bronchitis. BMJ 1969;4:265–269.
148. Isada CM, Stoller JK. Chronic bronchitis: the role of antibiotics. In:
Niederman MS, Sarosi GA, Glassroth J, editors. Respiratory infec-
tions: a scientiﬁc basis for management. London: W.B. Saunders;
1994. pp. 621–633.
149. Siafakas NM, Bouros D. Management of acute exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. In: Postma DS, Siafakas NM, editors.
Management of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Shefﬁeld,
UK: ERS Monograph; 1998. pp. 264–277.
150. Allegra L, Cordaro CI, Grassi C. Prevention of acute exacerbations of
chronic obstructive bronchitis with carbocysteine lysine salt mono-
hydrate: a multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Respi-
ration (Herrlisheim) 1996;63:174–180.
151. Guyatt GH, Townsend M, Kazim F, Newhouse MT. A controlled trial
of ambroxol in chronic bronchitis. Chest 1987;92:618–620.
152. Petty TL. The National Mucolytic Study: results of a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled study of iodinated glycerol in
chronic obstructive bronchitis. Chest 1990;97:75–83.
153. Siafakas NM, Vermeire P, Pride NB, Paoletti P, Gibson J, Howard P,
Yernault JC, Decramer M, Higenbottam T, Postma DS, et al.
Optimal assessment and management of chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease (COPD). The European Respiratory Society Task Force.
Eur Respir J 1995;8:1398–1420.
154. American Thoracic Society. Standards for the diagnosis and care of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
asthma. Am Rev Respir Dis 1987;136:225–244.
155. Hansen NC, Skriver A, Brorsen-Riis L, Balslov S, Evald T, Maltbaek
N, Gunnersen G, Garsdal P, Sander P, Pedersen JZ, et al.
Orally administered N-acetylcysteine may improve general well-
being in patients with mild chronic bronchitis. Respir Med 1994;88:
531–535.
156. British Thoracic Society Research Committee. Oral N-acetylcysteine
and exacerbation rates in patients with chronic bronchitis and severe
airways obstruction. Thorax 1985;40:832–835.
157. Boman G, Backer U, Larsson S, Melander B, Wahlander L. Oral
acetylcysteine reduces exacerbation rate in chronic bronchitis: report
of a trial organized by the Swedish Society for Pulmonary Diseases.
Eur J Respir Dis 1983;64:405–415.
552
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 23 ---
158. Rasmussen JB, Glennow C. Reduction in days of illness after long-term
treatment with N- acetylcysteine controlled-release tablets in patients
with chronic bronchitis. Eur Respir J 1988;1:351–355.
159. Decramer M, Rutten-van Molken M, Dekhuijzen PN, Troosters T, van
Herwaarden C, Pellegrino R, van Schayck CP, Olivieri D, Del Donno
M, De Backer W, et al. Effects of N-acetylcysteine on outcomes in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (Bronchitis Randomized on
NAC
Cost-Utility Study,
BRONCUS):
a randomised
placebo-
controlled trial. Lancet 2005;365:1552–1560.
160. Collet JP, Shapiro P, Ernst P, Renzi T, Ducruet T, Robinson A. Effects
of an immunostimulating agent on acute exacerbations and hospital-
izations in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The
PARI-IS Study Steering Committee and Research Group (Prevention
of Acute Respiratory Infection by an Immunostimulant). Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 1997;156:1719–1724.
161. Li J, Zheng JP, Yuan JP, Zeng GQ, Zhong NS, Lin CY. Protective
effect of a bacterial extract against acute exacerbation in patients with
chronic bronchitis accompanied by chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Chin Med J (Engl) 2004;117:828–834.
162. Anthonisen NR. OM-8BV for COPD. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1997;156:1713–1714.
163. Irwin RS, Boulet LP, Cloutier MM, Fuller R, Gold PM, Hoffstein V,
Ing AJ, McCool FD, O’Byrne P, Poe RH, et al. Managing cough as
a defense mechanism and as a symptom: a consensus panel report of
the American College of Chest Physicians. Chest 1998;114(2 Suppl
Managing):133S–181S.
164. Barbera JA, Roger N, Roca J, Rovira I, Higenbottam TW, Rodriguez-
Roisin R. Worsening of pulmonary gas exchange with nitric oxide
inhalation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Lancet 1996;
347:436–440.
165. Jones AT, Evans TW. NO: COPD and beyond. Thorax 1997;52:S16–S21.
166. Jennings AL, Davies AN, Higgins JP, Gibbs JS, Broadley KE. A
systematic review of the use of opioids in the management of
dyspnoea. Thorax 2002;57:939–944.
167. Eiser N, Denman WT, West C, Luce P. Oral diamorphine: lack of effect
on dyspnoea and exercise tolerance in the ‘‘pink puffer’’ syndrome.
Eur Respir J 1991;4:926–931.
168. Young IH, Daviskas E, Keena VA. Effect of low dose nebulised
morphine on exercise endurance in patients with chronic lung disease.
Thorax 1989;44:387–390.
169. Woodcock AA, Gross ER, Gellert A, Shah S, Johnson M, Geddes DM.
Effects of dihydrocodeine, alcohol, and caffeine on breathlessness and
exercise tolerance in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease
and normal blood gases. N Engl J Med 1981;305:1611–1616.
170. Rice KL, Kronenberg RS, Hedemark LL, Niewoehner DE. Effects of
chronic administration of codeine and promethazine on breathless-
ness and exercise tolerance in patients with chronic airﬂow obstruc-
tion. Br J Dis Chest 1987;81:287–292.
171. Poole PJ, Veale AG, Black PN. The effect of sustained-release morphine
on breathlessness and quality of life in severe chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1998;157:1877–1880.
172. Nici L, Donner C, Wouters E, Zuwallack R; ATS/ERS Pulmonary
Rehabilitation Writing Committee. American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society statement on pulmonary rehabilita-
tion. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2006;173:1390–1413.
173. Foglio K, Bianchi L, Bruletti G, Battista L, Pagani M, Ambrosino N.
Long-term effectiveness of pulmonary rehabilitation in patients with
chronic airway obstruction. Eur Respir J 1999;13:125–132.
174. Young P, Dewse M, Fergusson W, Kolbe J. Improvements in outcomes
for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) attributable to
a hospital-based respiratory rehabilitation programme. Aust N Z J
Med 1999;29:59–65.
175. Grifﬁths TL, Burr ML, Campbell IA, Lewis-Jenkins V, Mullins J, Shiels
K, Turner-Lawlor PJ, Payne N, Newcombe RG, Ionescu AA, et al.
Results at 1 year of outpatient multidisciplinary pulmonary rehabil-
itation: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2000;355:362–368. [Pub-
lished erratum appears in Lancet 2000;355:1280].
176. Goldstein RS, Gort EH, Stubbing D, Avendano MA, Guyatt GH.
Randomised controlled trial of respiratory rehabilitation. Lancet
1994;344:1394–1397.
177. Wijkstra PJ, Van Altena R, Kraan J, Otten V, Postma DS, Koeter GH.
Quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
improves after rehabilitation at home. Eur Respir J 1994;7:269–273.
178. McGavin CR, Gupta SP, Lloyd EL, McHardy GJ. Physical rehabilita-
tion for the chronic bronchitic: results of a controlled trial of exercises
in the home. Thorax 1977;32:307–311.
179. Nocturnal Oxygen Therapy Trial Group. Continuous or nocturnal
oxygen therapy in hypoxemic chronic obstructive lung disease:
a clinical trial. Ann Intern Med 1980;93:391–398.
180. Report of the Medical Research Council Working Party. Long term
domiciliary oxygen therapy in chronic hypoxic cor pulmonale com-
plicating chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Lancet 1981;1:681–686.
181. Tarpy SP, Celli BR. Long-term oxygen therapy. N Engl J Med 1995;
333:710–714.
182. Clinical indications for noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in
chronic respiratory failure due to restrictive lung disease, COPD, and
nocturnal hypoventilation consensus conference report. Chest 1999;116:
521–534.
183. Mehran RJ, Deslauriers J. Indications for surgery and patient work-up
for bullectomy. Chest Surg Clin N Am 1995;5:717–734.
184. Naunheim KS. Wood DE, Mohsenifar Z, Sternberg AL, Criner GJ,
DeCamp MM, Deschamps CC, Martinez FJ, Sciurba FC, Tonascia J,
et al. Long-term follow-up of patients receiving lung-volume-reduc-
tion surgery versus medical therapy for severe emphysema by the
National Emphysema Treatment Trial Research Group. Ann Thorac
Surg 2006;82:431–443.
185. Trulock EP. Lung transplantation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
1997;155:789–818.
186. Theodore J, Lewiston N. Lung transplantation comes of age. N Engl J
Med 1990;322:772–774.
187. Hosenpud JD, Bennett LE, Keck BM, Fiol B, Boucek MM, Novick RJ.
The Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Trans-
plantation: ﬁfteenth ofﬁcial report—1998. J Heart Lung Transplant
1998;17:656–668.
188. Annual report of the U.S. Scientiﬁc Registry for Transplant Recipients
and the Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network. Trans-
plant data: 1988–1994. Washington, DC: Division of Transplantation,
Health Resources and Services Administraion, U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services; 1995.
189. Hosenpud JD, Bennett LE, Keck BM, Edwards EB, Novick RJ. Effect
of diagnosis on survival beneﬁt of lung transplantation for end-stage
lung disease. Lancet 1998;351:24–27.
190. Maurer JR, Frost AE, Estenne M, Higenbottam T, Glanville AR.
International guidelines for the selection of lung transplant candi-
dates. The International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation,
the American Thoracic Society, the American Society of Transplant
Physicians,
the
European
Respiratory
Society.
Transplantation
1998;66:951–956.
191. Smetana GW. Preoperative pulmonary evaluation. N Engl J Med
1999;340:937–944.
192. Trayner E Jr, Celli BR. Postoperative pulmonary complications. Med
Clin North Am 2001;85:1129–1139.
193. Weisman IM. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in the preoperative
assessment for lung resection surgery. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg
2001;13:116–125.
194. Bolliger CT, Perruchoud AP. Functional evaluation of the lung re-
section candidate. Eur Respir J 1998;11:198–212.
195. Schuurmans MM, Diacon AH, Bolliger CT. Functional evaluation
before lung resection. Clin Chest Med 2002;23:159–172.
196. Celli BR, MacNee W. Standards for the diagnosis and treatment of
patients with COPD: a summary of the ATS/ERS position paper. Eur
Respir J 2004;23:932–946.
197. Regueiro CR, Hamel MB, Davis RB, Desbiens N, Connors AF Jr,
Phillips RS. A comparison of generalist and pulmonologist care for
patients hospitalized with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: resource intensity, hospital costs, and survival. SUPPORT
Investigators (Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for
Outcomes and Risks of Treatment). Am J Med 1998;105:366–372.
198. Gibson PG, Wlodarczyk JH, Wilson AJ, Sprogis A. Severe exacer-
bation of chronic obstructive airways disease: health resource use in
general practice and hospital. J Qual Clin Pract 1998;18:125–133.
199. Anthonisen NR, Manfreda J, Warren CP, Hershﬁeld ES, Harding GK,
Nelson NA. Antibiotic therapy in exacerbations of chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease. Ann Intern Med 1987;106:196–204.
200. Warren PM, Flenley DC, Millar JS, Avery A. Respiratory failure
revisited: acute exacerbations of chronic bronchitis between 1961–68
and 1970–76. Lancet 1980;1:467–470.
201. Gunen H, Hacievliyagil SS, Kosar F, Mutlu LC, Gulbas G, Pehlivan E,
Sahin I, Kizkin O. Factors affecting survival of hospitalised patients
with COPD. Eur Respir J 2005;26:234–241.
202. Rodriguez-Roisin R. Toward a consensus deﬁnition for COPD exac-
erbations. Chest 2000;117(5, Suppl 2):398S–401S.
GOLD Executive Summary
553


--- Page 24 ---
203. Burge S, Wedzicha JA. COPD exacerbations: deﬁnitions and classi-
ﬁcations. Eur Respir J Suppl 2003;41:46s–53s.
204. Seemungal TA, Donaldson GC, Bhowmik A, Jeffries DJ, Wedzicha
JA. Time course and recovery of exacerbations in patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2000;161:1608–1613.
205. White AJ, Gompertz S, Stockley RA. Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. 6: The aetiology of exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Thorax 2003;58:73–80.
206. Monso E, Ruiz J, Rosell A, Manterola J, Fiz J, Morera J, Ausina V.
Bacterial infection in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a study
of stable and exacerbated outpatients using the protected specimen
brush. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;152:1316–1320.
207. Pela R, Marchesani F, Agostinelli C, Staccioli D, Cecarini L, Bassotti
C, Sanguinetti CM. Airways microbial ﬂora in COPD patients in
stable clinical conditions and during exacerbations: a bronchoscopic
investigation. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis 1998;53:262–267.
208. Sethi S, Evans N, Grant BJ, Murphy TF. New strains of bacteria and
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J
Med 2002;347:465–471.
209. Sethi S, Wrona C, Grant BJ, Murphy TF. Strain-speciﬁc immune
response to Haemophilus inﬂuenzae in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2004;169:448–453.
210. Sethi S, Muscarella K, Evans N, Klingman KL, Grant BJ, Murphy TF.
Airway inﬂammation and etiology of acute exacerbations of chronic
bronchitis. Chest 2000;118:1557–1565.
211. White AJ, Gompertz S, Bayley DL, Hill SL, O’Brien C, Unsal I,
Stockley RA. Resolution of bronchial inﬂammation is related to
bacterial eradication following treatment of exacerbations of chronic
bronchitis. Thorax 2003;58:680–685.
212. Murphy TF, Brauer AL, Grant BJ, Sethi S. Moraxella catarrhalis in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: burden of disease and im-
mune response. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2005;172:195–199.
213. Emerman CL, Connors AF, Lukens TW, Effron D, May ME. Re-
lationship between arterial blood gases and spirometry in acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Ann Emerg
Med 1989;18:523–527.
214. Adams SJM, Luther M. Antibiotics are associated with lower relapse
rates in outpatients with acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Chest 2000;117:1345–1352.
215. Mueller C, Laule-Kiliam K, Frana B, Rodriguez D, Rudez J, Swcholer
A, Buser P, Pﬁsterer M, Perruchoud AP. The use of B-natriuretic
peptide in the managment of elderly patients with acute dyspnea.
J Intern Med 2005;258:77–85.
216. Richards AM, Nicholls MG, Epiner EA, Lainchbury JD, Troughton
RW, Elliott J, Framton C, Turner J, Crozier IG, Yandle TG. B-type
natriuretic peptide and ejectrion fraction for prognosis after myocar-
dial infarction. Circulation 2003;107:2786.
217. Davies L, Wilkinson M, Bonner S, Calverley PM, Angus RM.
‘‘Hospital at home’’ versus hospital care in patients with exacerba-
tions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: prospective rando-
mised controlled trial. BMJ 2000;321:1265–1268.
218. Ojoo JC, Moon T, McGlone S, Martin K, Gardiner ED, Greenstone
MA, Morice AH. Patients’ and carers’ preferences in two models of
care for acute exacerbations of COPD: results of a randomised
controlled trial. Thorax 2002;57:167–169.
219. Skwarska E, Cohen G, Skwarski KM, Lamb C, Bushell D, Parker S,
MacNee W. Randomized controlled trial of supported discharge in
patients with exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Thorax 2000;55:907–912.
220. Hernandez C, Casas A, Escarrabill J, Alonso J, Puig-Junoy J, Farrero
E, Vilagut G, Collvinent B, Rodriguez-Roisin R, Roca J, et al. Home
hospitalisation of exacerbated chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
patients. Eur Respir J 2003;21:58–67.
221. Thompson WH, Nielson CP, Carvalho P, Charan NB, Crowley JJ.
Controlled trial of oral prednisone in outpatients with acute COPD
exacerbation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1996;154:407–412.
222. Davies L, Angus RM, Calverley PM. Oral corticosteroids in patients
admitted to hospital with exacerbations of chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease: a prospective randomised controlled trial. Lancet
1999;354:456–460.
223. Niewoehner DE, Erbland ML, Deupree RH, Collins D, Gross NJ,
Light RW, Anderson P, Morgan NA. Effect of systemic glucocorti-
coids on exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Department of Veterans Affairs Cooperative Study Group. N Engl J
Med 1999;340:1941–1947.
224. Maltais F, Ostinelli J, Bourbeau J, Tonnel AB, Jacquemet N, Haddon
J, Rouleau M, Boukhana M, Martinot JB, Duroux P. Comparison of
nebulized budesonide and oral prednisolone with placebo in the
treatment of acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2002;165:698–703.
225. Aaron SD, Vandemheen KL, Hebert P, Dales R, Stiell IG, Ahuja J,
Dickinson G, Brison R, Rowe BH, Dreyer J, et al. Outpatient oral
prednisone after emergency treatment of chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease. N Engl J Med 2003;348:2618–2625.
226. Rodriguez-Roisin R. COPD exacerbations. 5: Management. Thorax 2006;
61:535–544.
227. Connors AF, Jr., Dawson NV, Thomas C, Harrell FE, Jr., Desbiens N,
Fulkerson WJ, Kussin P, Bellamy P, Goldman L, Knaus WA. Out-
comes following acute exacerbation of severe chronic obstructive lung
disease. The SUPPORT investigators (Study to Understand Progno-
ses and Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of Treatments). Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1996;154:959–967.
228. Shepperd S, Harwood D, Gray A, Vessey M, Morgan P. Randomised
controlled trial comparing hospital at home care with inpatient
hospital care. II: Cost minimisation analysis. BMJ 1998;316:1791–
1796.
229. Gravil JH, Al-Rawas OA, Cotton MM, Flanigan U, Irwin A, Stevenson
RD. Home treatment of exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmo-
nary disease by an acute respiratory assessment service. Lancet
1998;351:1853–1855.
230. Soderstrom L, Tousignant P, Kaufman T. The health and cost effects of
substituting home care for inpatient acute care: a review of the
evidence. CMAJ 1999;160:1151–1155.
231. National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE). Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease: national clinical guideline on management of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in adults in primary and
secondary care. Thorax 2004;59:1–232.
232. Barbera JA, Reyes A, Roca J, Montserrat JM, Wagner PD, Rodriguez-
Roisin R. Effect of intravenously administered aminophylline on
ventilation/perfusion inequality during recovery from exacerbations
of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am Rev Respir Dis 1992;
145:1328–1333.
233. Mahon JL, Laupacis A, Hodder RV, McKim DA, Paterson NA, Wood
TE, Donner A. Theophylline for irreversible chronic airﬂow limita-
tion: a randomized study comparing n of 1 trials to standard practice.
Chest 1999;115:38–48.
234. Lloberes P, Ramis L, Montserrat JM, Serra J, Campistol J, Picado C,
Agusti-Vidal A. Effect of three different bronchodilators during an
exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Eur Respir J
1988;1:536–539.
235. Murciano D, Aubier M, Lecocguic Y, Pariente R. Effects of theoph-
ylline on diaphragmatic strength and fatigue in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med 1984;311:349–353.
236. Emerman CL, Connors AF, Lukens TW, May ME, Effron D. Theoph-
ylline concentrations in patients with acute exacerbation of COPD.
Am J Emerg Med 1990;8:289–292.
237. Barr RG, Rowe BH, Camargo CA Jr. Methylxanthines for exacerba-
tions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: meta-analysis of
randomised trials. BMJ 2003;327:643.
238. Duffy N, Walker P, Diamantea F, Calverley PM, Davies L. Intravenous
aminophylline in patients admitted to hospital with non-acidotic
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a prospective
randomised controlled trial. Thorax 2005;60:713–717.
239. Seemungal T, Harper-Owen R, Bhowmik A, Moric I, Sanderson G,
Message S, Maccallum P, Meade TW, Jeffries DJ, Johnston SL, et al.
Respiratory viruses, symptoms, and inﬂammatory markers in acute
exacerbations and stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 2001;164:1618–1623.
240. Blasi F, Damato S, Cosentini R, Tarsia P, Raccanelli R, Centanni S,
Allegra L. Chlamydia pneumoniae and chronic bronchitis: association
with severity and bacterial clearance following treatment. Thorax
2002;57:672–676.
241. Seemungal TA, Wedzicha JA, MacCallum PK, Johnston SL, Lambert
PA. Chlamydia pneumoniae and
COPD
exacerbation.
Thorax
2002;57:1087–1088. [Author reply, 8–9.]
242. Greenstone M, Lasserson TJ. Doxapram for ventilatory failure due to
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2003;1:CD000223.
243. Lightowler JV, Wedzicha JA, Elliott MW, Ram FS. Non-invasive
positive pressure ventilation to treat respiratory failure resulting from
554
AMERICAN JOURNAL OF RESPIRATORY AND CRITICAL CARE MEDICINE
VOL 176
2007


--- Page 25 ---
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: Cochrane
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2003;326:185.
244. Meyer TJ, Hill NS. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation to treat
respiratory failure. Ann Intern Med 1994;120:760–770.
245. Brochard L, Mancebo J, Wysocki M, Lofaso F, Conti G, Rauss A,
Simonneau G, Benito S, Gasparetto A, Lemaire F. Noninvasive
ventilation for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. N Engl J Med 1995;333:817–822.
246. Kramer N, Meyer TJ, Meharg J, Cece RD, Hill NS. Randomized,
prospective trial of noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in
acute respiratory failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1995;151:1799–
1806.
247. Bott J, Carroll MP, Conway JH, Keilty SE, Ward EM, Brown AM, Paul
EA, Elliott MW, Godfrey RC, Wedzicha JA, et al. Randomised
controlled trial of nasal ventilation in acute ventilatory failure due to
chronic obstructive airways disease. Lancet 1993;341:1555–1557.
248. Plant PK, Owen JL, Elliott MW. Early use of non-invasive ventilation
for acute exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease on
general respiratory wards: a multicentre randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2000;355:1931–1935.
249. Esteban A, Anzueto A, Alia I, Gordo F, Apezteguia C, Palizas F, Cide
D, Goldwaser R, Soto L, Bugedo G, et al. How is mechanical
ventilation employed in the intensive care unit? An international
utilization review. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000;161:1450–1458.
250. International Consensus Conferences in Intensive Care Medicine.
Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation in acute respiratory failure.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2001;163:283–291.
251. Plant PK, Owen JL, Elliott MW. Non-invasive ventilation in acute
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: long term
survival and predictors of in-hospital outcome. Thorax 2001;56:708–
712.
252. Conti G, Antonelli M, Navalesi P, Rocco M, BuﬁM, Spadetta G,
Meduri GU. Noninvasive vs. conventional mechanical ventilation in
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease after failure of
medical treatment in the ward: a randomized trial. Intensive Care Med
2002;28:1701–1707.
253. Esteban A, Anzueto A, Frutos F, Alia I, Brochard L, Stewart TE,
Benito S, Epstein SK, Apezteguia C, Nightingale P, et al. Character-
istics and outcomes in adult patients receiving mechanical ventilation:
a 28-day international study. JAMA 2002;287:345–355.
254. Esteban A, Frutos F, Tobin MJ, Alia I, Solsona JF, Valverdu I,
Fernandez R, de la Cal MA, Benito S, Tomas R, et al. A comparison
of four methods of weaning patients from mechanical ventilation.
Spanish Lung Failure Collaborative Group. N Engl J Med 1995;332:
345–350.
255. Brochard L, Rauss A, Benito S, Conti G, Mancebo J, Rekik N,
Gasparetto A, Lemaire F. Comparison of three methods of gradual
withdrawal from ventilatory support during weaning from mechanical
ventilation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 1994;150:896–903.
256. Hilbert G, Gruson D, Portel L, Gbikpi-Benissan G, Cardinaud JP.
Noninvasive pressure support ventilation in COPD patients with
postextubation hypercapnic respiratory insufﬁciency. Eur Respir J
1998;11:1349–1353.
257. Kessler R, Faller M, Fourgaut G, Mennecier B, Weitzenblum E.
Predictive factors of hospitalization for acute exacerbation in a series
of 64 patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med 1999;159:158–164.
258. Mushlin AI, Black ER, Connolly CA, Buonaccorso KM, Eberly SW.
The necessary length of hospital stay for chronic pulmonary disease.
JAMA 1991;266:80–83.
259. Cotton MM, Bucknall CE, Dagg KD, Johnson MK, MacGregor G,
Stewart C, Stevenson RD. Early discharge for patients with exacer-
bations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized
controlled trial. Thorax 2000;55:902–906.
260. Hughes SL, Weaver FM, Giobbie-Hurder A, Manheim L, Henderson
W, Kubal JD, Ulasevich A, Cummings J. Effectiveness of team-
managed home-based primary care: a randomized multicenter trial.
JAMA 2000;284:2877–2885.
261. Hermiz O, Comino E, Marks G, Daffurn K, Wilson S, Harris M.
Randomised controlled trial of home based care of patients with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. BMJ 2002;325:938.
262. Stoller JK, Lange PA. Inpatient management of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Respir Care Clin N Am 1998;4:425–438.
263. Peach H, Pathy MS. Follow-up study of disability among elderly
patients discharged from hospital with exacerbations of chronic
bronchitis. Thorax 1981;36:585–589.
264. Eaton T, Withy S, Garrett JE, Mercer J, Whitlock RM, Rea HH.
Spirometry in primary care practice: the importance of quality assur-
ance and the impact of spirometry workshops. Chest 1999;116:416–423.
265. Schermer TR, Jacobs JE, Chavannes NH, Hartman J, Folgering HT,
Bottema BJ, van Weel C. Validity of spirometric testing in a general
practice population of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). Thorax 2003;58:861–866.
266. Schermer T, Eaton T, Pauwels R, van Weel C. Spirometry in primary
care: is it good enough to face demands like World COPD Day? Eur
Respir J 2003;22:725–727.
267. Rea H, McAuley S, Stewart A, Lamont C, Roseman P, Didsbury P. A
chronic disease management programme can reduce days in hospital
for patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Intern Med J
2004;34:608–614.
GOLD Executive Summary
555
==================================================
ABSTRACT
==================================================

Rabe, K.F.; Hurd, S.; Anzueto, A.; Barnes, P.J.; Buist, S.A.; Calverley, P.; Fukuchi, Y.; Jenkins, C.; Rodriguez-Roisin, R.; Weel, C. van; Zielinski, J. 2007, Article / Letter to editor (American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 176, 6, (2007), pp. 532-55)