==================================================
METADATA
==================================================

format: PDF 1.4
title: arXiv:astro-ph/9710327v2  10 Feb 1998
creator: dvips(k) 5.86 Copyright 1999 Radical Eye Software
producer: GPL Ghostscript 10.01.2
creationDate: D:20241126154734-05'00'
modDate: D:20241126154734-05'00'
page_count: 65
file_size: 770793
file_name: Schlegel1998_Maps_of_Dust_Infrared_Emission_for_Use_in_Estimati.pdf

==================================================
FULL TEXT
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:astro-ph/9710327v2  10 Feb 1998
Maps of Dust IR Emission for Use in Estimation of Reddening
and CMBR Foregrounds
David J. Schlegel
University of Durham, Department of Physics, South Road, Durham DH1 3LE, United
Kingdom
and
Douglas P. Finkbeiner & Marc Davis
University of California at Berkeley, Departments of Physics and Astronomy, 601 Campbell
Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
ABSTRACT
We present a full sky 100µm map that is a reprocessed composite of
the COBE/DIRBE and IRAS/ISSA maps, with the zodiacal foreground and
conﬁrmed point sources removed. Before using the ISSA maps, we remove the
remaining artifacts from the IRAS scan pattern. Using the DIRBE 100µm and
240µm data, we have constructed a map of the dust temperature, so that the
100µm map may be converted to a map proportional to dust column density.
The dust temperature varies from 17 K to 21 K, which is modest but does
modify the estimate of the dust column by a factor of 5. The result of these
manipulations is a map with DIRBE-quality calibration and IRAS resolution. A
wealth of ﬁlamentary detail is apparent on many diﬀerent scales at all Galactic
latitudes. In high latitude regions, the dust map correlates well with maps of H I
emission, but deviations are coherent in the sky and are especially conspicuous
in regions of saturation of H I emission toward denser clouds and the formation
of H2 in molecular clouds. In contrast, high-velocity H I clouds are deﬁcient in
dust emission, as expected.
To generate the full sky dust maps, we must ﬁrst remove zodiacal light
contamination as well as a possible cosmic infrared background (CIB). This
is done via a regression analysis of the 100µm DIRBE map against the
Leiden-Dwingeloo map of H I emission, with corrections for the zodiacal light
via a suitable expansion of the DIRBE 25µm ﬂux. This procedure removes
virtually all traces of the zodiacal foreground. For the 100µm map no signiﬁcant
CIB is detected. At longer wavelengths, where the zodiacal contamination is
weaker, we detect the CIB at surprisingly high ﬂux levels of 32 ± 13 nW/m2/sr


--- Page 2 ---
– 2 –
at 140µm, and 17 ± 4 nW/m2/sr at 240µm (95% conﬁdence). This integrated
ﬂux is ∼2 times that extrapolated from optical galaxies in the Hubble Deep
Field.
The primary use of these maps is likely to be as a new estimator of Galactic
extinction. To calibrate our maps, we assume a standard reddening law, and use
the colors of elliptical galaxies to measure the reddening per unit ﬂux density
of 100µm emission. We ﬁnd consistent calibration using the (B−R) color
distribution of a sample of 106 brightest cluster ellipticals, as well as a sample of
384 ellipticals with (B−V ) and Mg line-strength measurements. For the latter
sample, we use the correlation of intrinsic (B−V ) versus Mg2 index to greatly
tighten the power of the test. We demonstrate that the new maps are twice as
accurate as the older Burstein-Heiles reddening estimates in regions of low and
moderate reddening. The maps are expected to be signiﬁcantly more accurate
in regions of high reddening. These dust maps will also be useful for estimating
millimeter emission that contaminates CMBR experiments and for estimating
soft X-ray absorption.
We describe how to readily access our maps for general use.
Subject headings: Cosmology: observations — dust — extinction — infrared:
ISM: continuum
1.
Introduction
In the past 15 years, two NASA missions have revolutionized our knowledge of the
diﬀuse interstellar medium. The path-breaking Infrared Astronomy Satellite (IRAS) mission
of 1983 led to the ﬁrst full-sky maps of the diﬀuse background radiation in four broadband
infrared channels, centered at 12, 25, 60, and 100µm, with a ∼5 arcminute beam. The
DIRBE experiment (Diﬀuse InfraRed Background Experiment) onboard the COBE satellite
imaged the full sky in 10 broad photometric bands from 1µm to 240µm with a beam of
0.7◦. This experiment, for all but the shortest wavelength channels, was active for 42
weeks in 1989-1990 before its 4He cryogen was exhausted. Although IRAS was optimized
to detect point sources and sources of small angular extent (Beichman et al. 1988), it has
been possible to create large area sky maps from the IRAS data stream (ISSA images:
Wheelock et al. 1994). Striping artifacts from time variation in the zodiacal foreground
emission has largely been ﬁltered out of the individual ISSA maps, but artifacts remain and
the zero-point has large-scale drifts across the images. The DIRBE experiment had a much


--- Page 3 ---
– 3 –
better control of the absolute calibration and has two channels further to the submillimeter
than does IRAS (at 140µm and 240µm), but the maps have much less angular resolution.
The diﬀuse emission seen in these experiments is a superposition of zodiacal foreground
emission, dust and molecular emission from the interstellar medium (ISM), point sources
from within and beyond the Milky Way, and possibly a diﬀuse extragalactic background.
Separating these components has proven to be a most diﬃcult task (Hauser 1996).
The zodiacal emission dominates the 12µm and 25µm channels and is a quite serious
contaminant at 60µm, while its contribution to the 100µm maps is less strong. Modelling
of the zodiacal emission has proven quite complex (Reach et al. 1996). One must consider
that the zodiacal dust in the ecliptic plane has a distribution of temperatures, that the tilt
of Earth’s orbit relative to the midplane of the dust is readily detectable, and that the
zodiacal emission shows a strong dependence on solar elongation, information which is lost
if one uses only the annual-averaged map of the DIRBE data.
A full-sky map of the diﬀuse radiation serves many purposes, and we here report
our eﬀorts to combine the 100µm maps of IRAS and DIRBE in a manner designed to be
accessible to the general astrophysical community. To construct this map, we have removed
the zodiacal foreground emission from the DIRBE maps, removed striping artifacts from
the IRAS/ISSA maps, subtracted conﬁrmed point sources, and combined the maps in such
a way as to preserve the DIRBE calibration and IRAS resolution. We have used the ratio of
100µm to 240µm emission to deduce a dust color temperature, allowing us to translate the
100µm emission to a column density of radiating dust. Such a procedure may be inadequate
towards complex, dense clouds at low Galactic latitude, but in most directions the emission
is dominated by dust within a single environment and radiation ﬁeld.
Since the diﬀuse emission in the infrared is a direct measure of the column density of
the interstellar dust, such a map can be used as a measure of extinction for extragalactic
objects. As we shall argue below, the new dust map has better angular resolution and better
control of systematics than possible with the reddening maps of Burstein & Heiles (1978,
1982). The essence of the Burstein-Heiles procedure was to assume that variations in the
dust-to-neutral-gas ratio can be adequately modelled by the smoothed mean background of
galaxies (at northern declinations), or that this ratio is constant (at southern declinations).
We make no assumptions about variations in dust-to-gas; neither do we need make any
assumption about the correlation of diﬀuse ionized gas with neutral hydrogen. We only
make the weaker assumption that the distribution of dust grain sizes is everywhere the
same, since the relationship between UV/optical extinction and far-IR emission depends on
the grain size distribution (Draine & Lee 1984; Draine & Anderson 1985; Guhathakurta &
Draine 1989; Mathis & Cardelli 1992). The diﬀuse gas, where our results apply, is thought


--- Page 4 ---
– 4 –
to have reasonably uniform dust properties, with values of RV ≡A(V )/E(B−V ) ≈3.1.
Since neither the Burstein-Heiles nor our assumptions are true for all environments, a
comparison between the diﬀerent methods is of interest.
To calibrate the extinction curve, we extensively explored the anticorrelation of counts-
in-cells of the APM galaxy survey (Maddox et al. 1990b, 1990c) with 100µm emission,
ﬁnding a consistent calibration in diﬀerent directions of the sky. Due to complications in
translating this calibration into E(B−V ), we shall defer this discussion for a separate paper
(Finkbeiner et al. 1997).
Since we ﬁnd that the 100µm maps are well correlated with H I emission at high
latitudes, we do not not expect the new extinction maps to grossly deviate from the
Burstein-Heiles reddening estimates when averaged to the same scales. But many dusty
regions have ﬁlamentary structure with large ﬂuctuations in extinction estimates over
angular scales much smaller than the resolution of the BH maps. Furthermore, at low
Galactic latitudes, regions such as Orion and Ophiuchus might be saturated in H I emission,
or partially ionized, whereas the dust remains optically thin.
Another important application for maps of the diﬀuse emission is to compare with
CMBR ﬂuctuation maps. Recent analyses of the COBE/DMR ﬂuctuations (Kogut et al.
1996) show a positive correlation with DIRBE maps, particularly in the North Polar Spur
region. Similar correlations are seen between the Saskatoon CMBR maps and the IRAS
maps (Oliveira et al. 1997; Leitch et al. 1997; Jaﬀe et al. 1997). This is unexpected, since
these 40 GHz CMBR experiments are not sensitive to dust emission, but are sensitive to
free-free emission from the Warm Ionized Medium (WIM). This implies that the WIM
is at least partly correlated with the cold, dusty medium, and that our dust maps could
be used as a model for both components (Reynolds 1995). Alternatively, the observed
CMBR correlations might be explained by small spinning dust grains producing continuum
emission in the 10 −100 GHz range (Draine & Lazarian 1997), in which case the dust maps
should correlate extremely well with CMBR observations over the entire sky.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the processing of the DIRBE
data. We describe how the weekly averaged DIRBE maps are trimmed and then
reconstituted into annual average maps more suitable for our simple treatment of the
zodiacal light removal. We ﬁt a zodiacal light model by maximizing the correlation between
the DIRBE maps and H I in regions of high Galactic latitude and low ﬂux.
The diﬀuse cirrus emission is expected to have a reasonably uniform temperature since
the ultraviolet radiation ﬁeld which is heating the dust must be a smooth function of
angular position except within dense clouds. Fortunately, the emission at 100 and 240µm


--- Page 5 ---
– 5 –
is expected to be dominated by grains suﬃciently large to be in equilibrium with the
radiation ﬁeld (e.g. Draine & Anderson 1985; Guhathakurta & Draine 1989), so that the
100µm/240µm color ratio can provide a useful measure of grain temperature. In Section
2.4, we describe how we measure the temperature in the presence of substantial noise in
the 240µm map. This information is used to translate the 100µm emission to dust column
density.
The inclusion of the IRAS data is discussed in Section 3. Before we can combine the
IRAS/ISSA map with the DIRBE map, we must ﬁrst deal with the ISSA boundaries and
discontinuities. The ISSA maps are destriped versions of the original IRAS scans, but
further destriping is possible and essential for high angular-resolution studies. We use a
matched set of window functions that low-pass ﬁlter the DIRBE map to 1◦resolution and
high-pass ﬁlter IRAS/ISSA maps on the same scale. The combined map is then simply the
sum of these two ﬁltered maps. Section 4 details the removal of extragalactic objects and
point sources from the maps, leaving behind only a map of the dust emission.
In Section 5, we present a simple procedure for normalizing the reddening per unit ﬂux
density of dust emission. We correlate the residual of the (B−V ) vs. Mg2 index for 384
elliptical galaxies against the estimated reddening, and adjust the normalization until the
slope of the relation is zero. The resulting calibration has an uncertainty of only 10%. We
also show that the maps have an accuracy of 16% in predicting reddening, which is twice as
good as the older BH procedure.
A summary of all these reprocessing procedures in presented in Section 6. Readers
uninterested in the details of the analysis should skip directly to this point. General
discussion and conclusions are presented in Sections 7 and 8. Appendix A discusses the
contamination level of stars that remain in the maps. Appendix B describes how to relate
the reddenings and extinction in diﬀerent optical and infrared ﬁlters. Appendix C describes
how to access the ﬁnal maps.
2.
Dust Column Densities From the DIRBE Maps
2.1.
The DIRBE Data Set
The DIRBE data set is in the public domain and was obtained from the National
Space Science Data Center (NSSDC) on CDROM. For a complete description of the
DIRBE instrument, see Boggess et al. (1992). Both Annual Average Skymaps and maps
averaged over each week of the mission are provided. The data are binned to 393,216
0.◦32 × 0.◦32 pixels on the COBE Quadrilateralized Spherical Cube. (For a description of


--- Page 6 ---
– 6 –
this “skycube” projection, see Chan & O’Neill 1975.) As described below, we create new
annual average 25µm and 100µm skymaps from the 41 weekly maps in skycube format
in which the weighting function of each week is forced to be the same for both channels.
We then reproject the data to standard, equal-area, polar projections oversampled to 512
pixels from b = 0◦to b = 90◦(0.0250 square degrees/pixel). In order to preserve total ﬂux
to a good approximation, we initially projected to a Lambert (polar) mapping with 4 × 4
smaller pixels which were then binned to the 0.0250 square-degree resolution. (Note that
the surface brightness of the cirrus is preserved in this re-projection.) These maps for each
passband, b, are denoted by Db, and are in units of MJy/sr. We use the 25µm map as a
model of the zodiacal light, and the 100µm and 240µm maps for measuring the temperature
and column density of the dust.
2.2.
Zodiacal Light Removal
The DIRBE maps are severely contaminated by zodiacal emission from dust in the
solar system, otherwise known as the IPD (inter-planetary dust). The IPD primarily
re-radiates thermally at ∼280 K in the infrared (for ν0 emissivity). Its emission per unit
column density is substantially higher than that of 20 K Galactic dust: using an α = 2
emissivity law, the 100µm emission of the IPD is larger by a factor ∼105 than that of
Galactic dust for an equivalent column density. The brightest zodiacal emission is in the
ecliptic plane, at the level of ∼10 MJy/sr. Based upon our solutions, this corresponds to
an extinction at the negligible level of A(B) ≈10−6 mag. Thus, the removal of zodiacal
light emission is critical as it makes no measurable contribution to optical extinction.
The 25µm maps, where the IPD emission peaks, is used to model the IPD contamination
at the longer wavelengths. Before removing this contamination, the DIRBE annual average
data must ﬁrst be regenerated so that the data at all wavelengths are sampled at the
same time and through the same IPD. The zero-points of the zodiacal contamination are
constrained by H I maps at high Galactic latitude.
2.2.1.
Dependence on Time and Solar Elongation Angle
Removal of the zodiacal light is a diﬃcult problem. The observing strategy of the
COBE satellite resulted in a lower signal-to-noise ratio in the ecliptic plane where the
zodiacal light is most prominent. The number of high-quality DIRBE observations per
pixel ranged from ∼200 at the ecliptic equator to ∼800 near the ecliptic poles. The


--- Page 7 ---
– 7 –
least-sampled regions were approximately cones of 90◦opening angle centered at ecliptic
(λ, β) = (100◦, 0◦), and (λ, β) = (280◦, 0◦). The DIRBE maps exhibit a striping pattern
perpendicular to the ecliptic plane; scans adjacent in the sky correspond to temporally
separated instrument tracks, taken at varying solar elongation angles, through diﬀerent
column densities of IPD.
Measurements for each week of the mission were used to construct weekly skymaps.
The DIRBE Annual Average Skymaps are a combination of the weekly maps, averaged
by the number of times that each pixel was observed in a weekly map. Unfortunately, the
whole sky is not scanned each week, and some parts of the scanned region are omitted in
certain weeks due to interference from the moon and planets. Furthermore, not all the
detectors were on at all times.
A cursory glance at the weekly skymaps reveals a serious problem with combining data
in this way. Near the ecliptic plane, the 25µm ﬂux exhibits a strong dependence on solar
elongation angle, e. During the 41 weeks, data were typically taken between e = 64◦and
e = 124◦, and the 25µm ﬂux varies by a factor of two over this range. Comparison with the
100µm IPD ﬂux also reveals a strong temperature gradient with respect to e. This is easily
explained by assuming a radial gradient of IPD density from the sun, because a line of sight
passing close to the sun must traverse more (and hotter) dust than a line of sight at larger
solar elongation. As a further complication, because the 10 passbands were not always
observed simultaneously, the weekly skymaps of the weighting function do not always match
across all channels. Contributions to the Annual Average Skymaps were weighted according
to the number of observations made in each channel, in spite of the strong dependence on
elongation angle.
In cases where the measurement noise is overwhelmed by the time-dependent systematic
variations, this method of averaging is inappropriate. The weights assigned to sky pixels
are thus not always the same for the 25µm and 100µm weekly maps, leading to weighted
Annual Average Skymaps which cannot be directly compared to each other. To rectify
this, we recombine the 41 weekly skymaps using the same weight for the same pixels in
diﬀerent passbands. We use the error maps for the 100µm passband as weights in all other
passbands. Because the IPD temperature gradient is strongest at low e, we further delete
all data in each weekly map taken at e < 80◦. The resulting maps have noise and artifacts
which are somewhat worse than the Annual Average Skymaps from the NSSDC; however,
the artifacts are the same at both wavelengths. The resulting 25µm map is appropriate for
modelling the IPD contamination at other wavelengths.


--- Page 8 ---
– 8 –
2.2.2.
Scale and Zero-Point of the Zodiacal Light
The spatial-temporal variations of zodiacal light are complicated and diﬃcult to model
analytically. Our procedure for removing the zodiacal light assumes that the 100µm map
correlates linearly with H I at high Galactic latitudes and low ﬂux levels (Boulanger et al.
1996). Note that one should also expect some dust within the extensive ionized H+ zones,
and that the column density ratio N(H+)/N(H I) has considerable scatter in diﬀerent
directions (Reynolds 1990). The relationship between the diﬀuse ionized and neutral
hydrogen in any direction is complex (Reynolds 1995); some of the H+ is associated with
neutral gas, while other ionized clouds adjoin neutral regions. We are of course interested in
measuring the dust associated with both components, and to the degree that there is dust
within H+ regions not associated with neutral regions, the scatter of dust and H I will be
increased. The degree of scatter between neutral gas and dust is therefore of considerable
interest, but this scatter should not bias our procedure.
We consider the 25µm map as a template of the unwanted zodiacal foreground, as the
25µm channel is so thoroughly dominated by the IPD. In a few regions where the Galactic
cirrus contributes more than a few per cent to the 25µm emission, we interpolate the 25µm
map in bins of constant ecliptic latitude. To ﬁrst order, we subtract scaled versions of the
25µm map in order to minimize the scatter between the H I and zodiacal-corrected 100µm
and 240µm emission. We further reﬁne this correction with the addition of a quadratic
term to account for temperature variations in the IPD.
Fitting black-body functions to the zodiacal light from 12µm to 60µm, we ﬁnd that
the color temperature does not vary by more than ten percent from ecliptic equator to the
poles. This allows us to make a ﬁrst-order correction under the assumption that the IPD
is at a constant temperature. The DIRBE 25µm map, D25, is directly scaled to model
the zodiacal contamination at longer wavelengths. The raw maps for these other DIRBE
passbands, Db, are corrected to
DL
b = Db −AbD25 −Bb.
(1)
The coeﬃcient Ab determines the scaling of the zodiacal emission from the 25µm DIRBE
passband to passband b. The zero-point oﬀset, Bb, is used to account for a multitude
of non-zodiacal contributions to the 25µm and 100µm maps, either from the Galaxy or
extragalactic light. Although the 25µm map is relatively free of point sources, the ten
brightest sources have been masked to their local averages (see Table 1). Note that these
sources were not excluded from the 100µm or 240µm maps.
Assuming that H I correlates linearly with dust at high latitudes and low ﬂux
levels, we make use of the H I ﬂux to determine the zodiacal ﬂux scaling coeﬃcients and


--- Page 9 ---
– 9 –
zero-point oﬀsets. We compare the emission, DL, to the H I column density, H, from
the Leiden-Dwingeloo 21-cm survey (Hartmann & Burton 1996). The 21-cm emission is
summed in the velocity range −72 < vLSR < +25 km/s, which samples almost all of the
Galactic H I at high Galactic latitudes. (At high latitudes, H I outside of this range shows
no correlation with the 100µm maps). We solve for the coeﬃcients Ab and Bb of equation 1
and the H I-to-DIRBE ratio, ζb, using a least-squares minimization of
χ2 =
X
i
"ζb(DL
b )i −Hi
σi
#2
(2)
in each passband. The errors in this relation are systematic and diﬃcult to express
analytically. Therefore, we take the uncertainties, σi, to be proportional to the H I ﬂux.
The ﬁtting procedure is performed on the maps binned to 2.5◦and limited to those areas
of the sky with low emission, H I < 200 K km/s, or N(H) < 3.7 × 1018 cm−2 (19% of the
sky). Two dust clouds with unusual temperature and the region immediately around the
very bright source NGC 253 are omitted from the ﬁts. The results of these ﬁts for b = 100,
140, 240µm are presented in Table 2, and a scatter diagram is shown in Figure 1 both (a)
before and (b) after the correction.
Temperature variations in the IPD make the linear correction of equation 1 inadequate
for our purposes. Based on 12µm/25µm and 25µm/60µm ratios, the color temperature of
the IPD varies by 5% for an α = 1 emissivity law or by 10% for an α = 2 emissivity law.
Because the 100µm band is on the Rayleigh-Jeans side of the spectrum, this results in a 5 or
10% error in zodiacal light. As the zodiacal light contributes up to 10 MJy/sr at 100µm in
the ecliptic plane, this results in absolute errors of 1 MJy/sr, with a strong ecliptic latitude
dependence. A constant temperature, linear model of zodiacal dust removal is a good ﬁrst
approximation, but is clearly too simplistic. Because the neighboring passbands at 12µm
and 60µm are a complex mix of zodiacal and non-zodiacal contributions, it is desirable to
model the variation in IPD temperature using only the 25µm map rather than some linear
combination of passbands. Thus we are driven to higher order ﬁts using only the 25µm
map.
The temperature variations in the IPD are most strongly a function of ecliptic latitude,
β. An adequate second-order function for modelling the variations in IPD emission at
longer wavelengths is to include a term that is linear in the product of D25 and ¯D25(β),
the mean 25µm emission at each ecliptic latitude (limited to |b| > 20◦to minimize Galactic
contamination in the model). With a scaling coeﬃcient, Qb, the corrected maps then
become
DQ
b = Db −(Ab + Qb ¯D25(β))D25 −Bb.
(3)
The above is referred to as the quadratic correction. Solutions are again found via equation


--- Page 10 ---
– 10 –
2 using the same region of the sky as before. Results are presented in Table 2. Since
the linear and quadratic contributions are not orthogonal, there is no particular physical
meaning to the coeﬃcients derived in the quadratic ﬁts; they are merely the coeﬃcients
which yield the minimum χ2.
The result of the quadratic correction is shown in Figure 1(c). At 100µm, the quadratic
correction is clearly superior to the linear correction, reducing the RMS scatter from 19%
to 16% (for H I< 200 K km/s). At 240µm, the diﬀerence between the two ﬁts is negligible.
This is both because the 240µm map has a higher inherent noise, and because the zodiacal
light correction at such long wavelengths is smaller. Even though there is no obvious
diﬀerence in ﬁtting methods at 240µm, we apply the quadratic correction to both passbands
to avoid introducing systematic errors into the determination of the dust temperature.
Using the Bell Laboratories H I survey (Stark et al. 1992) instead of Leiden-Dwingeloo
results in a zero-point change in the ﬁnal 100µm map of only 0.013 MJy/sr, with a standard
deviation of 0.047 MJy/sr.
In principle, the ﬁt should be done between the H I gas and the total column density
of dust. The total column is a complicated function of the 100 and 240µm maps, and the
zodiacal-light coeﬃcients for both those maps need be ﬁt simultaneously. This non-linear ﬁt
with six parameters is not stable, primarily because the DIRBE 240µm signal-to-noise ratio
is too low at high latitudes. For this reason, we have performed the ﬁt independently for the
100 and 240µm maps. As long as the temperature of the dust does not vary signiﬁcantly
and systematically with ecliptic latitude, then the ﬁt coeﬃcients for our zodiacal model
should be valid. As we discuss in the following section, variations in the Galactic dust
temperature at the high latitudes used in these ﬁts are hardly measurable above the noise.
This least-squares minimization procedure is used only to remove the zodiacal
foreground. Our measure of the best removal is minimal scatter between the far-IR dust
emission and 21-cm emission. There could well be an additional component of dust that is
not correlated with the H I emission, such as dust associated with diﬀuse H+ regions. In
such a situation, our procedure for zodiacal foreground removal should remain unbiased,
but the interpretation of the ﬁt coeﬃcients would be diﬀerent. The slope Ab would signify
the amount of dust associated with neutral gas mixed with ionized gas, while the oﬀset
Bb would be the dust associated with instrumental oﬀset, the CIB, and dust emission
associated with a uniform sphere of diﬀuse H+.
This method of zodiacal light correction is by no means deﬁnitive. A more thorough
examination of the problem is currently under way by Reach and collaborators (Reach
1997). They are performing a detailed modelling in three-dimensional space of the IPD
that includes the dependence of dust temperature and density on the distance from the


--- Page 11 ---
– 11 –
Sun, as well as speciﬁc dust bands, and the inclination of the dust cloud with respect to the
Earth’s orbit. However, our model is adequate for the present analysis. In the worst case,
assuming that all of the residual scatter in the corrected 100µm plots at H I< 100 K km/s
is due to imperfectly-subtracted zodiacal light, the RMS of this error is 0.05 MJy/sr. This
corresponds to an error of 0.004 mag in A(B).
2.3.
Zodiacal Removal to Isolate the CIB
As a digression at this point, the question of the cosmic infrared background (CIB)
was a major motivating factor for the DIRBE experiment. The extraction of the CIB has
proven to be a considerable challenge (Hauser 1996), and to date CIB detections from
DIRBE data have been reported as upper limits. The regression analysis described above
is one method to approach such a measurement, provided the zodiacal model is adequate.
The coeﬃcient B of the regression ﬁts is a constant term that remains after the zodiacal
foreground dust and all Galactic dust correlated with H I emission is removed. This term is
not likely to be an instrumental oﬀset, since DIRBE had a cold-load internal chopper and
the entire telescope was cold. A signiﬁcant detection of B is either a measure of the CIB or
due to some unknown instrumental artifact.
Since the zodiacal dust is conﬁned to a thin zone in the ecliptic plane of the solar
system, along directions away from the ecliptic plane, all the zodiacal foreground is
approximately 1 A.U. from the Sun. It is therefore reasonable to assume the zodiacal
foreground emission of our reconstructed yearly maps to be the same temperature in all
directions, for suﬃciently high |β|. Thus a linear model should be adequate for removal
of the zodiacal emission. However, one cannot look strictly at the ecliptic poles, since the
25µm maps vary only a factor of 3.5 from the ecliptic plane to the pole; a suitable lever arm
in β is therefore essential to decouple the isotropic CIB from the smoothly varying zodiacal
foreground.
We have performed linear regression analyses for the 100µm, 140µm, and 240µm maps
as a function of the lower limit on ecliptic latitude, |β|, using the procedures described in
Section 2.2.2. The results are listed in Table 3. The quoted errors represent the formal 95%
conﬁdence intervals, and do not incorporate systematic errors due to our choice of zodiacal
model. For the zero-point term, B, the quoted errors are dominated by covariance with the
zodiacal coeﬃcient, A. At 100µm, we have no signiﬁcant detection, largely because the
zodiacal foreground is quite substantial. At 140µm and 240µm, the determination of B is
signiﬁcant and non-zero. These are possibly measurements of the CIB, as we discuss in
Section 7.4 below.


--- Page 12 ---
– 12 –
2.4.
DIRBE Temperature Maps
The main component of Galactic dust detected by DIRBE spans a color temperature
range of 17 K to 21 K for an assumed λ−2 emissivity (Reach et al. 1995). At the extremes
of this temperature range, the emission at 100µm will diﬀer by a factor of 5 for the same
column density of dust. Therefore, it is crucial to use temperature information to recover
the dust column density. There are three useful DIRBE bands for computing the Galactic
dust temperature, centered at 100µm, 140µm and 240µm. The median signal-to-noise
ratio per pixel for these maps at |b| > 10◦is 164, 4.2, and 4.9, respectively. Because of
the high S/N at 100µm, we will use that map as a spatial template and multiply it by a
temperature-correction factor derived from the 100µm to 240µm ratio. The 140µm map is
not used because of its large noise level compared to the nearby 100µm map. We attempt
no temperature correction in regions of very low emission, since our procedure will introduce
noise and the exact temperature of the dust in these dilute regions is less important.
2.4.1.
FIR Spectrum of the Dust
Estimation of the dust color temperature and column density is complicated by our
lack of knowledge about dust opacities and temperature distributions. Our procedure
works only if the large grains responsible for the emission at 100 to 240µm are in thermal
equilibrium with the interstellar radiation ﬁeld, and the smaller, transiently heated dust
grains make a negligible contribution to emission at these wavelengths. Fortunately, these
assumptions appear to be in agreement with our current understanding of interstellar dust
emission (Guhathakurta & Draine 1989; Sodroski et al. 1997).
Because the ISM is optically thin in the FIR, the intensity Iν is given by
Iν =
Z
ds ρκνBν(T),
(4)
where T is the grain temperature, ρ is the mass density, Bν is the Planck function, κν is the
opacity, and the integral is over the physical path length. Since the dust particles are small
(radii a < 0.25µm) compared to FIR wavelengths, the opacity κν does not depend upon the
details of the particle size distribution. However, the opacity does depend upon the nature
of the material. In general, the opacity follows a power law in the FIR,
κν ∝να.
(5)
The Draine & Lee (1984) model predicts that the FIR emission is predominately from
graphite with α ≈2.0. Layer-lattice materials, such as amorphous carbon, have opacities


--- Page 13 ---
– 13 –
α ≈1.0, and silicates have α ≈1.5. We have chosen α = 2.0 in deriving our dust
temperatures. Though this choice directly aﬀects the temperature estimation, we show that
our ﬁnal dust column densities are completely insensitive to this choice. The reason for this
insensitivity is that the DIRBE passbands are suﬃciently near the Wien tail of the dust
spectrum.
“Classical” grains with radii a > 0.05µm exposed to ambient starlight retain an
equilibrium temperature. In the section that follows, we assume such an equilibrium and ﬁt
each line-of-sight with a single color temperature. However, each line-of-sight through the
Galaxy may pass through several regions at diﬀerent equilibrium temperatures. By ignoring
multiple temperature components, we systematically underestimate the true column density.
We have modelled this eﬀect by ﬁtting a single color temperature to emission from 18 K
dust added to emission from another region at temperature TB. For diﬀerent choices of TB
and its mass fraction, fB, we compare the recovered dust column to the true column density
(Figure 2). For the range 15 < TB < 21.5 K, the true column is at most underestimated by
10%. A factor of two error would result only in contrived circumstances with TB < 12 K or
TB > 33 K. As the majority of the sky spans only a ﬁve degree range of temperature, our
single-temperature model is deemed satisfactory.
Another constituent of the dust which we have ignored are very small grains (VSGs),
with radii a <∼0.005µm. These VSGs are stochastically heated by the interstellar radiation
ﬁeld (ISRF), and cannot be characterized by a single temperature. VSGs undergo a
sudden rise in temperature following absorption of a visible or UV photon, followed by a
nearly-continuous decline in temperature as the heat is radiated away in the form of many
FIR photons. Such grains are assumed to be responsible for the stronger-than-expected
Galactic cirrus emission observed by IRAS at 12 −60µm. The contribution from VSGs at
the wavelengths we use to ﬁt the temperature (λ > 100µm) is small (Draine & Anderson
1985; Guhathakurta & Draine 1989). Thus, the VSGs do not spoil our derivation of the
column density due to classical grains. VSGs would be signiﬁcant to our dust maps only
if their density is much higher than expected, and their distribution diﬀerent from that of
classical grains in the diﬀuse ISM.
2.4.2.
Recovering a Temperature Map
The 100µm and 240µm maps are too noisy to recover a reliable and independent dust
color temperature at each DIRBE pixel. In the regions of low signal-to-noise, a ﬁltering
scheme is required. One option is to smooth the maps with a large beam, using the resulting
maps to construct a heavily-smoothed temperature map. This simple technique has the


--- Page 14 ---
– 14 –
disadvantage of throwing away small-scale information in the compact dusty regions where
the signal-to-noise ratio is high. The spirit of most ﬁltering methods is to produce a map
with a fairly uniform signal-to-noise ratio. An optimal scheme would smooth the data where
there is no signal (and very little dust), and leave the data unsmoothed in the regions with
large signal (and more dust). However, such schemes (e.g., the minimum-variance Wiener
ﬁlter) have the disadvantage of overweighting low S/N pixels near high S/N pixels in such
a way that bright sources have noisy halos.
One way to avoid artifacts such as halos around bright sources is to ﬁlter the maps
on a local basis at each pixel. We assume that regions of very little dust have a uniform
temperature. This allows us to combine the DIRBE maps with background averages taken
at high Galactic latitudes, weighting in such a way that we preserve S/N.
To generate the temperature-correction map from the zodiacal-light-corrected DIRBE
maps, we ﬁrst remove 13 bright point sources from the DIRBE images (including M31,
the LMC, and the SMC; see Table 1). We smooth both the 100µm and 240µm maps
with a Gaussian ﬁlter of FWHM= 1.1◦, which determines the resolution of the resulting
temperature map.
The dust eﬀective color temperature is recovered from the ratio of intensities at 100µm
and 240µm. Using the ﬁltered DIRBE maps from equation 7, we deﬁne the ratio map
R = DS
100
DS
240
,
(6)
where
DS
b = WDQ
b + (1 −W) ¯DQ
b .
(7)
Each ﬁltered map, DS
b , is a weighted average of the local (Gaussian-smoothed) DIRBE ﬂux
and the background average ﬂux determined at high Galactic latitude. The background
average ﬂux, ¯DQ
b , is determined separately in the North and South Galactic hemispheres.
The weight function, W, determines how to ﬁlter the resulting R between the local quantity
and the background average. Where W is small, the resulting R will have the high latitude
background value, as appropriate in regions of low S/N. In regions of high S/N, the weight
function approaches unity and R reduces to the local value of the ﬂux density ratio. The
advantages of this method are that it has no leakage from neighboring pixels and that the
scale of the smoothing is constant. Therefore, noise generated by the ratio of two small,
uncertain numbers is suppressed. The background averages are assessed in each hemisphere
by simply averaging the 100µm and 240µm ﬂux within the window |b| > 75◦. The ratios are
0.661 in the north and 0.666 in the south.
We determine the weight function W by a minimum-variance analysis of the resulting


--- Page 15 ---
– 15 –
ratio map R. For this purpose we use a map of the standard deviation of measured 240µm
ﬂux at each point, σ240, reduced by the eﬀective binning of the Gaussian smoothing of the
maps. For the 240µm map, the DIRBE errors are in the range 0.5 < σ240 < 2.0 MJy/sr,
much larger than for the 100µm map. Because the detector noise is negligible for the 100µm
data, we construct a weight function that minimizes the variance in the reciprocal of the
color ratio, δ2(1/R),
D
δ2(1/R)
E
=
σ2
240W2 +
 ¯DQ
240 −¯DQ
100/RT
2 (1 −W)2

DQ
100 −¯DQ
100
2 W2 +
 ¯DQ
100
2 (1 −W)2
(8)
where RT is an assumed mean color ratio. We use RT = 0.55, but the results are insensitive
to this choice. Minimization of this function with respect to W leads to a quadratic
equation whose solution is a map of the weight function
W = W(DQ
100, RT, ¯DQ
240, ¯DQ
100, σ240).
(9)
The resulting W function is close to the simple expression W = DQ
240/(DQ
240 + 5) for typical
noise levels in the DIRBE 240µm map.
To convert from the ratio map, R, to eﬀective color temperature, we need to know the
emissivity model for the dust, ǫν, and the frequency response of the DIRBE instrument
passbands, W(ν). This information is combined to form a color-correction factor, Kb, for a
passband b. Using an ǫν = να emissivity model,
Kb(α, T) =
Z
dνBν(T)ναWb(ν),
(10)
The DIRBE Explanatory Supplement (1995), Appendix B, has tabulated Kb(α, T) for all
their bands in the domain 0 < α ≤2 and 10 K ≤T ≤2 × 104 K. These color-correction
factors are well ﬁt by a functional form
K(α, T) =
P
i aiτ i
P
j bjτ j ;
τ ≡log10T.
(11)
Coeﬃcients for these ﬁts at α = 2.0 are presented in Table 4. The ﬁts are accurate to
one percent at all temperatures. The measured ﬂux in passband b, Db, of dust emitting
thermally with a να emissivity is
Db = Kb(α, T)Ib(T),
(12)
where Ib is the actual intensity at the frequency b. Calculating the ratio, R(α, T), that
DIRBE would measure for a given temperature and emissivity model,
R(α, T) = D100
D240
= K100(α, T)I100(T)
K240(α, T)I240(T).
(13)


--- Page 16 ---
– 16 –
We interpolate the function Kb(α, T) for 3000 temperatures and invert equation 13, yielding
T(R). The emissivity model α = 1.5 yields a color temperature ∼2 K hotter than α = 2.0,
but the eﬀect of this on the recovered dust column density is not signiﬁcant aside from
an overall, multiplicative normalization. Aside from this normalization, the ﬁnal column
density maps vary only at the 1% level for an α = 1.5 versus α = 2.0 emissivity model. For
all calculations that follow, we have chosen α = 2.0 in agreement with the Draine & Lee
(1984) dust model. The resulting temperature map is shown as Figure 3. The light regions
on the temperature map denote warmer dust, while the darker regions denote cooler dust
where the 100µm ﬂux underestimates the column density of dust. Note that most of the
sky is a neutral grey color, while several prominent, high latitude molecular cloud regions
show up as dark ﬁlaments. A few isolated white (hot) spots correspond to the LMC, SMC,
and O-star regions near Ophiuchus and Orion.
We compute the column density of dust as the amount of 100µm emission we would
expect if the dust were all at a reference temperature of T0 = 18.2 K. The column density,
DT, is expressed as the 100µm ﬂux multiplied by a temperature-correction factor, X:
DT = DQ
100X,
(14)
where
X(α, T) = B(T0)K100(α, T0)
B(T)K100(α, T)
(15)
and B(T) is the Planck function. For an α = 2.0 emissivity model and an arbitrary
reference temperature of T0 = 18.2 K, we combine equations 13 and 15 to solve for X as a
function of the DIRBE 100µm/240µm ratio. The solution is well ﬁt by
log10X = −0.28806 −1.85050 (log10R) −0.02155 (log10R)2.
(16)
A temperature map, T, is recovered with the function,
log10T = 1.30274 + 0.26266 (log10R) + 0.04935 (log10R)2.
(17)
The maximum deviation of these ﬁts is 0.8% in the domain 10 < T < 32 K. The column
density map, DT, recovered from equation 14, is our model for the Galactic dust at DIRBE
resolution.
3.
Folding in IRAS Resolution
The infrared maps from the COBE satellite have the advantages of being well-calibrated
and well-corrected for zero point drift. However, with a resolution of 0.◦7 FWHM, the


--- Page 17 ---
– 17 –
COBE/DIRBE maps utterly fail to resolve important ﬁlamentary details in the cirrus and
detect only the very brightest point sources. Therefore, we resort to use of the older IRAS
satellite data to improve upon this limited angular resolution.
The IRAS satellite observed 97% of the sky in four passbands, detecting some 250, 000
point sources, including ∼20, 000 galaxies. In addition to these point sources, the satellite
discovered the infrared cirrus, especially visible in the 100µm band (Low et al. 1984). As the
instrument was designed for point source detection (diﬀerential photometry), it is far from
optimal for the absolute photometry required to make sense of the cirrus. In particular, the
zero-point from one scan to the next drifts considerably, leaving stripes with power on a
range of scales, from a few arcminutes to several degrees.
The IRAS Sky Survey Atlas (ISSA: Wheelock et al. 1994) released by IPAC in
1991-1994 is the most useful presentation of the IRAS data for our purposes. The ISSA
sky is divided into 430 plates 12.5 degrees square and spaced roughly every 10 degrees in
right ascension and declination. The ISSA maps suﬀer from the zero-point drifts as well as
residual zodiacal light. Despite the best eﬀorts at IPAC to remove striping artifacts and
zodiacal light, these features are still quite obviously present. This limits the usefulness of
these maps for many applications.
We have reprocessed the ISSA data to create a 100µm map with the following
properties:
• ISSA plates destriped, reducing the amplitude of the striping artifacts by a factor of
∼10,
• de-glitching algorithm employed to remove small-scale artifacts that are not conﬁrmed
on other IRAS scans,
• IRAS missing data areas ﬁlled in with DIRBE data,
• IRAS zero-point drifts corrected to DIRBE on scales ≥1◦,
• angular resolution close to the IRAS limit (FWHM= 6.1′),
• extragalactic objects removed to a ﬂux limit of f100 ≈1.2 Jy at |b| > 5◦,
• stars removed to a ﬂux limit of f100 ≈0.3 Jy at |b| > 5◦.
The combination of our destriping algorithm and the DIRBE zero-point in eﬀect removes
zodiacal contamination from the ISSA maps. Section 3.1 discusses our Fourier destriping
algorithm. Removal of deviant pixels, including asteroids, is described in Section 3.2.


--- Page 18 ---
– 18 –
Section 3.3 describes the method used to combine DIRBE and IRAS data to form our ﬁnal
maps. The removal of 20, 000 point sources is the topic of Section 4.
3.1.
De-striping the ISSA Maps
IPAC took steps to destripe the ISSA plates, including a zodiacal light model and
local destriping algorithm. However, serious striping remains. Fortunately, the scanning
strategy of the IRAS satellite gives suﬃcient information to remove most of the striping
artifacts that remain. Cao et al. (1996) have made important progress towards destriping
the maps and deconvolving the IRAS beam reponse in small regions of the sky. However,
due to the complexity of their algorithm and large amount of computing time required, it
is impractical at this time to apply such a method to the full sky. We have developed an
algorithm that is straightforward to implement and can easily be applied to the full sky.
We consider each ISSA plate separately, and manipulate it in Fourier space. One ISSA
plate and its Fourier transform are seen in Figure 4(a) and (b), where zero wavenumber is
at the center. The rays emanating from the center are a clear signature of the striping in
real space. The problem then becomes one of removing this excess power in Fourier space
that is associated with the real-space stripes. Because the IRAS satellite scanned most of
the sky two or three times, usually at a diﬀerent angle, the contamination in Fourier space
occurs at diﬀerent wavenumbers for each scan. Thus, the contaminated wavenumbers from
one scanning angle can be replaced with wavenumbers from the other scanning angles.
The steps involved are (1) identifying the contaminated wavenumbers, and (2) an optimal
replacement strategy which allows for the lack of full coverage for many of the scans.
Because the stripes are radial in Fourier space, we parameterize the Fourier domain
in polar coordinates (kr, kθ) for the purposes of this discussion, although it is discretely
sampled in kx and ky for calculations.
For each ISSA plate, there are 3 HCONs (hours-conﬁrmed scans) referred to as
HCON-1, HCON-2, and HCON-3. The composite map generated from these is called
HCON-0, but when we refer to “the HCONs” we mean HCONs 1, 2, and 3. Many of these
individual HCONs contain data with striping in only one direction. In general, however,
a single HCON image may contain data taken in multiple scan directions, and signiﬁcant
regions of missing data. In many cases, HCON-3 contains little or no data. For each HCON
map there is a corresponding coverage map, which was used by IPAC to compute a weighted
average of the three HCONs for each plate. (These coverage maps were kindly provided to
us by S. Wheelock). The Explanatory Supplement also reports the use of a local destriper,


--- Page 19 ---
– 19 –
but it appears to have had negligible eﬀect in low-ﬂux regions of the sky.
3.1.1.
Criterion for Bad Wavenumbers
With each plate, we begin by generating a composite map from the three HCONs,
using the three coverage maps for weights. This is equivalent to the HCON-0 composite
maps released with the ISSA, except that no local destriper has been applied, and asteroids
and other artifacts have not been removed.
Because our method is based on Fourier transforms where bright point sources may
overwhelm many modes, we perform a crude point source removal before any analysis.
This consists of selecting objects or regions which are more than 0.7 MJy/sr above the
median-ﬁltered image. Several tests of this method indicate that it masks all signiﬁcant
point sources but not the striping. These sources are then replaced with the median
of an annulus around them. Because these sources are only removed when identifying
contaminated modes, the details of this process are unimportant.
This composite HCON-0 image (without point sources) is smoothed with a 6′-FWHM
Gaussian to produce a baseline image which is used to ﬁll in missing pixels in each of
the three HCONs. This smoothing is enough to suppress most of the striping, and the
replacement of missing pixels allows us to Fourier transform completely-ﬁlled, square
images. Before transforming, we subtract the mean value from each image, apodize the
edges, and embed the 500 × 500 image in a 1024 × 1024 array (which is equivalent to
demanding isolated boundary conditions). The transform for a typical plate is shown in
Figure 4(b).
It is necessary to deﬁne a criterion with which to select the contaminated wavenumbers.
We denote the FFT of HCON-n as Fn and a particular element of k-space as Fn(kr, kθ). We
bin the Fourier domain into 90 azimuthal bins, each 2 degrees wide in kθ. A background
power as a function of kθ is determined by ﬁrst ﬁnding the median at each θ, then
median-ﬁltering the result. We deﬁne a power ratio, γθ, as the ratio of the power in each
kθ bin to the background power. By normalizing in this way, we expect γθ to be near
unity except in angular bins that are contaminated by stripes. We somewhat arbitrarily
choose γθ < 1.2 to be “good” power and γθ > 1.6 to be “bad.” Between these two cuts,
the information is deemed acceptable for retention, but poor enough to avoid replacing
other “bad” power with it. In this way, “good” power is used where available, and we avoid
corrupting real structures by not discarding power whose ratio is less than 1.6.


--- Page 20 ---
– 20 –
3.1.2.
The Destriping Algorithm
Each HCON is destriped separately before combining them to an averaged map.
Because of the incomplete coverage in some HCONs, it would not be optimal to combine
the images in Fourier space. Instead, for each HCON-n, we create a stripe image, Sn, which
is removed in real space. In this way, we may utilize the good data in each HCON, even if
only a fraction of the plate is covered.
A composite of “good” power, Fgood, is generated by averaging all power at each
(kr, kθ) with γθ < 1.2. Any mode with no “good” power is set to zero. (Modes with
wavelengths larger than 1◦are not changed to avoid discreteness problems.) A bad pixel
mask is produced for each HCON, indicating which regions of each Fn are contaminated.
The diﬀerence between Fn and Fgood for bad modes only is inverse-transformed to obtain
Sn, the stripes corresponding to HCON-n. This stripe map is subtracted from each raw
HCON to produce individual, destriped HCONs. Note that only stripes have been removed,
and the destriped images retain all of the original point sources and other real structures.
These destriped images are then de-glitched (following section) and averaged, weighted by
the coverage maps, to obtain the ﬁnal HCON-4 images.
Figure 5 shows the one-dimensional power spectrum of four plates before and after
the destriping process. The destriping has reduced the high spatial-frequency variance by
nearly a factor of two in some high Galactic-latitude areas. In cases where the point sources
subtraction fails, nothing is done to the plate. This occurs only at low Galactic latitude
where the striping artifacts are overwhelmed by cirrus emission. We have not found stripes
to be important for the generation of a reddening map in these areas, so we have done
nothing about them.
3.2.
De-glitching the ISSA Maps
In addition to striping, the ISSA images contain other artifacts that must be removed.
These anomalous features include transient sources, such as asteroids, and detector glitches
that should have been removed from the time-ordered data stream. Images with two or
more HCONs allow identiﬁcation of these artifacts by looking for discrepant pixels. We
generically term this process “de-glitching.” IPAC chose to de-glitch the ISSA images
by visual inspection. This post-production step removed anomalies from individual
HCONs before combining them to produce HCON-0 images. Thus, HCON-0 diﬀers from a
coverage-map-weighted average of the HCONs wherever anomalies were removed. Rather
than rely upon visual inspection, we implement an automated de-glitching algorithm.


--- Page 21 ---
– 21 –
The ﬁrst task is to identify discrepant points. We compare each destriped HCON to
a local median, ﬁltered on a 10.′ scale. Because some ISSA pixels have better coverage
than others, they have lower noise. Therefore, we set the threshold for a deviant pixel
at 2/
√
N MJy/sr, where N is the number of times IRAS observed that pixel. The pixels
which deviate from the median-ﬁltered background by more than this threshold are ﬂagged,
as are their immediate neighbors. Pixels ﬂagged in all available HCONs are deemed to be
“conﬁrmed sources.” These include real point sources, knots in the cirrus, and also pixels
near regions of no data. In all these regions, asteroids cannot be diﬀerentiated from features
that should remain in the map. However, pixels that are ﬂagged in at least one, but not all,
HCONs are ﬂagged as “glitches.” These pixels and their neighbors are replaced with data
from the other HCONs. The reader should note that cirrus features are not modiﬁed by
this algorithm.
Our de-glitching algorithm aﬀects less than 0.1 percent of the sky. For comparison,
IPAC removes 0.47% of pixels at |β| < 20◦and 0.19% of pixels at |β| > 20◦. The resulting
destriped and de-glitched ISSA maps are termed HCON-4.
Three planets were scanned by IRAS and not adequately removed from the ISSA plates.
These require special attention, as Saturn in particular is enormously bright compared to
the background ﬂux. Neptune and Uranus moved suﬃciently between scans that they can
be removed in one HCON while retaining coverage in the other HCONs. Because Neptune
appears close to the Galactic plane, its surface brightness is comparable to the background
level of ∼100 MJy/sr. We remove it in each HCON with a circle of radius 7.5′. Uranus
is only incompletely removed from the ISSA plates, still causing hysteresis in the in-scan
direction. We remove areas of 220′ in the in-scan direction and 94′ in the cross-scan.
Saturn is problematic since it appears only in HCON-1 and HCON-2, and moves very little
between those scans. Because of this, we excise a circle of radius 2◦in all HCONs. This
area, centered at (l, b) = (326.28◦, +51.66◦), is treated like the exclusion strip and ﬁlled
with DIRBE data (see following section). The planet removal is implemented before the
destriping algorithm, and the de-glitching procedure afterwards.
3.3.
Combining ISSA with DIRBE
The ISSA and DIRBE data are combined in such a way as to retain the small-scale
information from IRAS and the large-scale calibration of DIRBE. The ISSA HCON-4 maps
are processed to match the color response and zero-point of the zodiacal-subtracted DIRBE
100µm maps on scales larger than one degree. Regions with no IRAS data are ﬁlled with
DIRBE-resolution data. The maps are ﬁrst projected into two 4096 × 4096 pixel polar


--- Page 22 ---
– 22 –
projections, one for the north and another for the south.
The ISSA maps are ﬁrst multiplied by a constant value, C, to approximately correct
the IRAS gain to that of DIRBE. The relative gain factors between DIRBE and IRAS are
diﬃcult to assess exactly, owing to the drifts in IRAS zero-points. The DIRBE Explanatory
Supplement presents a preliminary linear transformation between IRAS and DIRBE data
based upon carefully selected regions (in an obsolete version of the Supplement, but
reprinted in Wheelock et al. 1994, Table IV.D.1). They ﬁnd the IRAS brightness levels to
be too high by 38% at 100µm. This is a compromise value, as we ﬁnd the IRAS calibration
to be too high by this value for the cirrus, yet consistent with DIRBE for bright point
sources. We choose to globally recalibrate the IRAS data with a compromise value of
C = 0.87. We also convolve the ISSA images with a FWHM= 3.2′ Gaussian, W G(3.2′),
bringing the eﬀective IRAS smoothing to 6.1′.
In order to correct the IRAS zero-point to that of DIRBE on scales > 1◦, we construct
a diﬀerence map between the two on these scales. This diﬀerence map, S, is added to the
destriped IRAS map, Ides, to yield a ﬁnal map containing the small-scale information from
IRAS with the large-scale calibration of DIRBE (after zodiacal correction):
Icorr = C · Ides ∗W G(3.2′) + S.
(18)
The diﬀerence map must be taken between the IRAS and DIRBE data ﬁltered to the same
point spread function. The procedure is complicated by the fact that neither the IRAS
nor DIRBE beams are Gaussian. The DIRBE point spread function is approximately 42′
square with power-law tails. Fortunately, for most of the sky, repeated scans from diﬀerent
directions result in an averaged DIRBE response approximated by a circular tophat.
Therefore, the ISSA map is convolved with a circular tophat of radius 21′, W ✷(21′), while
still in the 1.5′ pixel plates, then is re-projected to a polar projection, introducing the same
distortions that exist in the DIRBE projections. At this point, both maps are further
smoothed by a FWHM= 40.′ Gaussian to obtain a ﬁnal map with FWHM= 1.00◦. The
diﬀerence map is
S = [DQ −C · Ides ∗W G(3.2′) ∗W ✷(21′)] ∗W G(40′),
(19)
where DQ represents the 100µm DIRBE map after zodiacal correction (equation 3). The
RMS of the diﬀerence map is 0.9 MJy/sr at |b| > 30◦, which is representative of the
zero-point drifts in the IRAS/ISSA maps.
Due to the diﬀering color responses, the residual of the smoothed ISSA and DIRBE
maps has a few high and low regions, near very bright sources. Other than NGC 253, these
are all in the Galactic plane, the LMC or the SMC. We mask these regions in the diﬀerence


--- Page 23 ---
– 23 –
map to the median of an annulus around them (see Table 1). This treatment is not meant
to be strictly correct, and introduces substantial absolute errors, relative to the rest of the
map. However, on top of the sources, the fractional errors are not signiﬁcant, and this
procedure eliminates halos and recovers the correct zero-point nearby the sources.
Regions of missing ISSA data must be ﬁlled with DIRBE data in a way that treats the
boundaries of the missing ISSA data properly. Both steps of the ISSA smoothing process
are done in the following way: a mask, set to 1 for good pixels and 0 for missing data, is
smoothed in the same way as the data. The missing data is zero-ﬁlled so that it does not
contribute to the smoothed result. After smoothing, mask pixels with values less than 0.5
are discarded, and the remaining pixels are properly weighted by dividing by the value
in the smoothed mask. The mask generated by the second ISSA smoothing is applied to
the DIRBE data set as well, so that in both maps, pixels near a boundary only contain
information from the “good” side of the boundary. Point sources just barely on the “bad”
side should contribute equal tails to the “good” side, eliminating potential problems with
the zero calibration.
The column density of dust that radiates at 100 −240µm is recovered with
DT = IcorrX,
(20)
where we have replaced the DIRBE 100µm ﬂux with the corrected IRAS 100µm ﬂux
in equation 14. The temperature-correction map, X, is necessarily only at the DIRBE
resolution of ∼1◦, although the reprocessed IRAS map has a ﬁnal resolution of 6.1′.
4.
Removing Point Source and Extragalactic Objects
For the purposes of an extinction map, only the Galactic infrared cirrus is of interest.
Our dust maps are meant to trace the diﬀuse emission from dust as well as localized clumps,
such as Bok globules, which are typically on the scale of a few arcminutes. The stars,
planetary nebulae and other point (unresolved) sources in the ISSA must be eliminated.
We also remove veriﬁed extragalactic objects down to a given ﬂux limit. The resulting
maps should be free of all contaminating sources and galaxies at |b| > 5◦, and most such
sources in select regions at lower latitudes.


--- Page 24 ---
– 24 –
4.1.
Strategy
Our goal is to replace contaminating sources with the most likely value of the
underlying 100µm emission. The most obvious solution is to subtract the ﬂux multiplied by
the PSF for each source. However, the shape of the PSF is neither Gaussian nor circularly
symmetric, and its shape depends upon the IRAS scan directions at each position on the
sky. Because of these uncertainties, and because many extragalactic objects are not point
sources anyway, we replace sources with a median value from the surrounding sky. For
point sources, we replace pixels within a radius of either 5.25′ (for f100 < 10 Jy) or 7.5′ (for
f100 ≥10 Jy). For extended sources, we replace pixels within the measured radius plus 1.5′.
The median is always taken from a surrounding annulus with the same area as its interior.
In total, 1.2% of the ISSA pixels at |b| > 5◦are ﬂagged as sources and replaced. The LMC,
SMC and M31 and sources in their vicinity are not removed. At latitudes |b| < 5◦, we
remove galaxies and stars only in those parts of the sky deemed unconfused by the PSCZ
galaxy survey (Saunders 1997).
Sources are not identiﬁed from the IRAS 100µm maps due to the confusion with cirrus.
Instead, sources are primarily identiﬁed from the 60µm band of the IRAS Point Source
Catalog (PSC), where confusion with cirrus is less of a problem and the spatial resolution
is somewhat better.
4.2.
Extragalactic Sources
Galaxies detected by the IRAS satellite have been extensively studied, and lists of
such objects are readily available from the literature. Rice et al. (1988) have studied the
largest galaxies detected by IRAS. Strauss et al. (1992) and Fisher et al. (1995) completed
a redshift survey of IRAS galaxies to a ﬂux limit of 1.2 Jy at 60µm over most of the sky.
The PSCZ redshift survey (Saunders 1997) covers a somewhat smaller area of sky to a lower
ﬂux limit of 0.6 Jy.
Many nearby galaxies are resolved in the ISSA maps and cannot be treated as point
sources. Rice et al. have studied those galaxies with blue-light isophotal diameters greater
than 8′, and reports improved total ﬂux densities from the IRAS data. The 70 large
galaxies with a total ﬂux at 60µm exceeding 0.6 Jy are removed from our maps as extended
objects (excepting the LMC, SMC, M31 and M32, due to its proximity to M31). These
objects are removed using a radius equal to one-half their major-axis, isophotal diameter
at B = 25 mag/⊓⊔, plus 1.5′. The radius of NGC 253 is increased to 36′ to remove IRAS
hysteresis artifacts near this extremely bright source.


--- Page 25 ---
– 25 –
The IRAS 1.2 Jy Galaxy Survey identiﬁes most infrared-emitting galaxies at |b| > 5◦
down to a ﬂux limit of 1.2 Jy at 60µm (Fisher et al. 1995). Fluxes for extended sources
were systematically underestimated by the PSC, and were improved with a process called
ADDSCANing (Strauss et al. 1990). The galaxy survey employed a color selection,
f 2
60 > f12f25, which very eﬃciently discriminates between galaxies and stars. Each candidate
source was classiﬁed based upon visual inspection of POSS and ESO plates, or upon
inspection of CCD images if the plates were inconclusive. Planetary nebulae were identiﬁed
spectroscopically. The survey identiﬁes 5320 galaxies with f60 > 1.2 Jy. In addition, 444
point sources made the ﬂux and color cuts: 98 extragalactic H II regions, 210 stars, and 136
planetary nebulae. All these galaxies and point sources are removed from our maps, unless
they coincide with the large (Rice et al.) galaxies already removed, or the LMC, SMC and
M31. We ignore the sources classiﬁed as “cirrus or dark cloud”, “unobserved” or “empty”
ﬁelds, and two reﬂection nebulae.
The PSCZ redshift survey covers nearly the same region of sky as the 1.2 Jy survey,
but to a ﬂux limit of 0.6 Jy at 60µm. This survey employed an additional color cut,
f100/f60 < 4, which retains approximately 97% of galaxies. A list of PSCZ identiﬁcations
was provided by Will Saunders (1997) before publication. This list includes 15, 285 galaxies,
many of which are duplicates from the 1.2 Jy Survey. These galaxies, plus an additional
455 objects measured as unresolved by the ADDSCAN process, are removed from the dust
maps.
The 1.2 Jy and PSCZ surveys did not have complete sky coverage. Two strips in
ecliptic longitude (the exclusion strip) were not observed by the IRAS satellite, amounting
to 4% of the sky. Other regions, primarily at low Galactic latitude, are too confused by
cirrus emission to make reliable source identiﬁcations. These galaxy surveys divided the
sky into approximately one-degree-square “lune” bins, from which masks were constructed.
The 1.2 Jy survey masks those bins at |b| < 5◦, in the exclusion strip, or with more than
16 sources per square degree. These “confused” bins comprise 3.5% of the sky at |b| > 5◦,
and are primarily located in star-forming regions such as Orion-Taurus, Ophiuchus and
Magellanic Clouds. The PSCZ survey masks a larger fraction of the sky at high latitudes
(8.5%), but includes 1.2% of the sky at low latitudes which is not confused.
We identify and remove a small number of galaxies by hand to make our dust maps as
free as possible from contamination at |b| > 5◦. The Point Source Catalog was searched for
objects brighter than 1.2 Jy that were masked from both the 1.2 Jy and PSCZ surveys. 195
satisﬁed the PSCZ color criteria for galaxies. Upon visual inspection of ISSA plates and the
Digitized Sky Survey, 68 were identiﬁed as point sources or galaxies, and removed from the
dust maps.


--- Page 26 ---
– 26 –
The many faint galaxies that remain in our maps are not signiﬁcant. As the median
galaxy color is f100/f60 = 2.0, our adopted ﬂux cut at 60µm roughly corresponds to
f100 > 1.2 Jy. Galaxies just below this limit will have a peak ﬂux density of ∼0.12 MJy/sr
at 100µm, corresponding to A(B) ≈0.01 mag. Thus, the ﬁnal extinction maps will have
some small-scale contamination from extragalactic objects at that level. This contamination
is very nearly uniformly distributed. In addition, very faint galaxies must contribute at
some level to a uniform, extragalactic ﬂux. This contribution cannot be easily extrapolated
from known galaxies, since the measured number counts, N ∝f −1.4
60
, must ﬂatten at low
ﬂux levels to prevent the total number and total ﬂux from diverging. However, any uniform
contamination is irrelevant, as it is degenerate with the constant term in the zodiacal
contamination which has already been removed (Section 2.2.2).
4.3.
Stars
We remove stars from the ISSA maps in all regions of |b| > 5◦, and select regions of
lower latitude. Strauss et al. (1990) found that the infrared color criterion
f 2
60 < f12f25
(21)
eﬀectively discriminates stars from galaxies. We identify as stars all PSC objects that
satisfy this color cut. At latitudes |b| > 5◦(and not near M31, LMC and SMC), 4697
sources with f60 > 0.6 Jy are selected for removal from the dust maps. At lower latitudes,
we only select stars in the unmasked regions of the PSCZ survey. A higher ﬂux cut of
f60 > 1.2 Jy selects 97 stars in those low-latitude zones.
In Appendix A, we show that any remaining, fainter stars produce negligible
contamination.
5.
Using the Maps to Measure Galactic Reddening
For the past 17 years, almost all extragalactic observers have made reddening and
extinction corrections using the maps of Burstein & Heiles (BH: 1978, 1982). The BH maps
derive the column density of dust from H I 21-cm ﬂux. At northern declinations (δ > −23◦),
the BH maps are modulated by local H I-to-dust ratios on scales of 13 deg2, derived from
the Shane-Wirtanen galaxy counts. The DIRBE/IRAS dust maps, on the other hand,
directly measure the dust, and no corrections need be made for optically thick H I emission,
for ionization, or for the formation of molecular hydrogen. Furthermore, the DIRBE/IRAS
maps are of uniform quality over the full sky, whereas the BH maps exclude all regions


--- Page 27 ---
– 27 –
at |b| < 10◦(17.4% of the sky), as well as a region of 1080 square degrees (2.6% of the
sky) lacking 21-cm data. This latter region is near the south Galactic pole, approximately
bounded by −135◦< l < 21◦and b < −62◦.
We limit the discussion of tests of our reddening map to two extragalactic reddening
measurements. These tests provide conﬁrmation that our dust maps are indeed suitable
estimates of reddening, as good as or better than those of BH. These tests also normalize
the amplitude of reddening (in magnitudes) per unit of 100µm ﬂux (in MJy/sr). Our
reddening estimates can be written simply as
E(B−V ) = p DT = p IcorrX,
(22)
where we seek the calibration coeﬃcient p. DT represents the point-source-subtracted,
IRAS-resolution 100µm map, corrected to a reference temperature of 18.2 K using the
DIRBE temperature map (equation 20).
The reddening of external galaxies allows a straightforward calibration of our maps.
For example, consider the sample of brightest cluster ellipticals of Postman & Lauer
(1995), for which (B−R) colors are provided for 106 galaxies. These objects are at
modest redshift (z < 0.05) and well-distributed over the sky. We use the k-corrected
colors provided and apply our dust maps to estimate the reddening toward each galaxy,
assuming E(B−R) = 1.64 E(B−V ) for normal grains with RV = 3.1 (see Appendix B).
For a good normalization of the dust map, one expects no correlation between intrinsic
(B−R) for the galaxies and E(B−V ). Because the distribution of the intrinsic (B−R) of
the BCG galaxies is not Gaussian, it is best to use a non-parametric statistical procedure
to test the correlation. We measured the Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcient between
extinction-corrected (B−R) and E(B−V ). For calibration constants p < 0.0118 or
p > 0.0196, the chances that a random distribution would have a correlation as large as
observed is less than 5%. Thus, our 95% conﬁdence limits for the normalization of the
maps is p = 0.016 ± 0.004. As conﬁrmation of the procedure, we applied the same statistic
to these galaxies using the BH reddening estimates:
E(B−V ) = q EBH.
(23)
EBH represents the BH reddening in (B−V ), limiting the analysis to the 99 galaxies
with BH estimates. For a scaling factor in the range 0.66 < q < 1.05, the BH reddening
applied to the BCG galaxies leave no signiﬁcant correlation between intrinsic (B−R) and
foreground reddening, indicating that the BH normalization (q = 1) is acceptable.
A sharper test of the reddening calibration is possible by using an auxiliary correlate
to reduce the variance of the intrinsic color distribution. For example, the Mg2 index


--- Page 28 ---
– 28 –
described by Faber et al. (1989) is expected to correlate closely with the intrinsic (B−V )
color for elliptical galaxies. For both increased metallicity and increased stellar population
age, the line-strength increases and the colors become redder. Use of the the Mg2 index
is ideal, since it is available for large samples and is not aﬀected by reddening. We use
the sample of 472 elliptical galaxies presented by Faber et al., which has very broad sky
coverage, including many galaxies in rather dusty directions. Of this sample, 389 galaxies
have photoelectric colors in ≤30′′ apertures, Mg2-index measurements, and estimates of BH
reddening. Five of these galaxies are reported by D. Burstein to have suspect photometry
and have been removed for our list (NGC 83, 545, 708, 1603, and 7617). The (B−V ) colors
are listed in this catalog as being k-corrected and reddening-corrected in a manner that
deviates slightly from BH reddenings given in the published full-sky BH map. In one region
of the sky (230◦< l < 310◦, −20◦< b < +15◦) it was determined that the BH map is
not reliable and reddenings were assigned based upon deviations in the Mg-color relation
(Burstein et al. 1987). We have added the tabulated reddening corrections back to the
colors to obtain the raw (only k-corrected) colors before proceeding with our analyses. We
should note that the unreliable region lacks a dust-to-gas ratio estimate in the BH map
construction.
Dave Burstein kindly sent us an updated version of Faber et al.’s Table 1, in which
the Mg2 estimates have been improved. For these objects, we compute a linear regression
of reddening-corrected (B−V ) against Mg2, with residuals δ(B−V ). We compute the
Spearman rank correlation coeﬃcient of δ(B−V ) versus the reddening estimate, again
arguing that a good dust map will have no residual correlation. For the BH reddenings
as listed by Faber et al. 1989, or for the published BH reddening estimates, there is no
signiﬁcant residual correlation between δ(B−V ) and the reddening estimate. Our formal
normalization of the BH map is q = 0.90 ± 0.09, with the standard deviation in δ(B−V )
reduced from 0.048 mag to 0.031 mag.
Applying the same procedure to the DIRBE/IRAS maps we ﬁnd a 95% conﬁdence
range p = 0.0184 ± 0.0014 for the calibration constant. For p values in this range, the
standard deviation of δ(B−V ) is reduced to 0.028 mag. A plot of (B−V ) residuals from the
Mg-color relation versus reddening is shown in Figure 6, using both BH and DIRBE/IRAS
reddening estimates. A diﬀerent symbol type is used for galaxies in the north (DEC> −23◦;
squares) versus the south (DEC< −23◦; crosses), as the BH maps do not utilize dust-to-gas
information for the southern points. Galaxies with no BH map values were not used in
the ﬁts, but are shown in the lower panel as asterisks. A slight trend in the residuals is
evident for both BH and DIRBE/IRAS corrections, in the sense that the highest reddening
values appear to be overestimated. However, this trend is not statistically signiﬁcant for
the DIRBE/IRAS corrections. Note that the galaxies lacking BH estimates (asterisks) were


--- Page 29 ---
– 29 –
not used in the ﬁts, but still have reasonable color residuals using DIRBE/IRAS reddening
corrections.
The larger size and reduced intrinsic-color scatter of the Faber et al. sample leads to
a much tighter constraint on p, one which is consistent with the value derived from the
BCG sample. The 10% precision of the calibration is remarkably tight, and is consistent
with early estimates of IRAS reddening calibrations from Rowan-Robinson et al. (1991).
(However, we note that IRAS-only estimates of the reddening severely suﬀer from the
poorly-constrained zero-point, zodiacal contamination, and un-accounted variations in the
dust temperature.)
The accuracy of the reddening maps can be estimated from the residuals in the
Mg-color relation. We assume that the errors in the reddening estimates, σD−I, are
fractional, increasing with increasing reddenings such that
σD−I = f E(B−V ).
(24)
We further assume that the intrinsic dispersion in the Mg-color relation is σBV = 0.0257 mag
(including measurement errors), which is the measured dispersion for a sub-sample of
galaxies in clean regions of the sky. A total error for the color of each galaxy is the
quadrature sum of σD−I and σBV. Using this model for the errors, one can determine the
accuracy of the reddenings by increasing f until the χ2 of the ﬁt equals the number of
degrees of freedom. For the BH reddening maps, we ﬁnd f = 0.29, and for the DIRBE/IRAS
reddening maps we ﬁnd f = 0.16. This demonstrates that the DIRBE/IRAS reddening
estimates have an accuracy of 16%, which is nearly a factor of two improvement over the
BH estimates for this full-sky comparison. In regions of low reddening, E(B−V ) <∼0.1 mag,
this data set indicates that DIRBE/IRAS and BH reddening estimates may be equally
good.
The Burstein & Heiles reddening map appears to be more accurate in the Northern sky
(δ1950 > −23◦), where where galaxy counts were used to model gas/dust variation. Splitting
the data into two subsamples, one ﬁnds f = 0.25 for the 257 galaxies at δ1950 > −23◦, and
f = 0.31 for the 115 galaxies at δ1950 < −23◦. Burstein et al. (1987) identify one region
in the Southern sky, approximately bounded by l = [230◦, 310◦], b = [−20◦, 20◦], where a
low dust/gas ratio is presumed to make the BH predictions too large. We ﬁnd that the
dust/gas ratio in this region is variable, but not unusual on average. Comparing the BH
map to Leiden-Dwingeloo 21-cm data in the South, we conclude that the BH map may be
unreliable near their survey edges at b = ±10◦. Within the region identiﬁed by Burstein et
al., we ﬁnd a smaller region, bounded by l = [230◦, 240◦], b = [−15◦, −10◦], which appears
corrupted and too high in the BH map.


--- Page 30 ---
– 30 –
We had originally attempted to use counts-in-cells of the APM galaxy survey (Maddox
et al. 1990b, 1990c) as a normalization of the dust map. Extinction as measured by the
DIRBE/IRAS column-density maps can be calibrated by studying the statistical covariance
between the APM and DIRBE/IRAS dust maps: dusty regions have increased dust
emission and diminished galaxy counts. However, we encountered a problem similar to that
seen by Heiles (1976) when he attempted to compare reddening measures to the counts
of Shane-Wirtanen galaxies. Using the APM counts, we ﬁnd a normalization (p) that is
approximately twice that described above. The extra sensitivity of the galaxy counts to
dust is almost certainly due to the catalog of galaxies being surface-brightness limited as
well as magnitude limited; increased foreground dust not only diminishes the total ﬂux of
the galaxy but diminishes the size of the isophotal aperture and increases the likelihood
that the galaxy will be either classiﬁed as a star or not be counted at all. We shall provide
details of this analysis in a separate paper (Finkbeiner et al. 1997).
6.
Processing Summary
We have extensively processed the available far-IR data sets to generate a uniform-
quality, column-density map of the dust that radiates from 100µm to 240µm. The major
steps in the processing are summarized below:
1. The annual average DIRBE maps have been regenerated such that the same zodiacal
dust column is observed at all wavelengths. Data with solar elongation e < 80◦has
been deleted.
2. A zodiacal light model has been constructed from the DIRBE 25µm map. The model
parameters were constrained by forcing the dust to trace the gas (as measured by the
Leiden-Dwingeloo H I survey) at high Galactic latitudes.
3. Striping artifacts in the IRAS/ISSA 100µm maps were removed using a Fourier-space
ﬁltering algorithm.
4. Asteroids and non-Gaussian noise was removed from the IRAS/ISSA maps using a
de-glitching algorithm that compared multiple scans.
5. The IRAS and DIRBE 100µm maps were combined, preserving the DIRBE zero-point
and calibration.
6. Stars and galaxies were removed to a limiting ﬂux of f60 = 0.6 Jy over most of the
sky at |b| > 5◦, and parts of the sky at lower latitudes.


--- Page 31 ---
– 31 –
7. The color temperature of the dust was derived from the DIRBE 100µm and 240µm
maps. A temperature-correction map is used to convert the 100µm cirrus map to a
map proportional to dust column.
8. The temperature-corrected dust map is calibrated to the reddening of external
elliptical galaxies. The use of the (B−V ) vs. Mg2 correlation allows us to set the
calibration constant to 10% precision.
We have conﬁrmation of the superiority of the new procedure by a test of the scatter
of residual (B−V ) colors after regression against Mg2 line-strength. The scatter of the
regression is dominated by intrinsic scatter among the galaxies. We measure a reduction in
the variance consistent with a fractional error in the reddening estimates of 16% for the
new maps versus 29% for the BH estimates.
7.
Discussion
7.1.
The Nature of the Full-Sky Infrared Cirrus
The new data show a wealth of ﬁlamentary structure that extends to the smallest
scale resolved by our maps. A representative slice of the sky is shown in Figure 7, where
we present the BH image, the Leiden-Dwingeloo H I image, the dust map with DIRBE
resolution, and the ﬁnal dust map with IRAS resolution. This slice displays part of the
Polaris Flare on the left and the delicate structure of the high-latitude Draco molecular
cloud complex (Herbstmeier, Heithausen, & Mebold 1993; Mebold et al. 1985), also
known as MBM complex 26 (Magnani, Blitz, & Mundy 1985), to the right of center.
The small-scale structure in the plot is at the resolution limits of the IRAS data. Higher
resolution data would perhaps show even ﬁner scale structure.
The full-sky dust map is shown as Figure 8 with a logarithmic stretch to emphasize
the faint, high latitude features. The cirrus ﬁlaments arch across the Galactic poles, and
between these ﬁlaments there are several low-density holes. The Lockman hole, the region
of minimum ﬂux in the H I maps (l = 150.5◦, b = 53◦; Lockman et al. 1986), is one such low
density region, with a temperature-corrected ﬂux of 0.39 MJy/sr. The Southern Galactic
sky contains regions with even lower dust emission, perhaps by a factor of two. The lowest
column density holes are located at l = 346.4◦, b = −58.0◦, and l = 239.7◦, b = −48.6◦,
with temperature-corrected ﬂuxes of 0.18 MJy/sr. Unfortunately, no high-quality H I data
exists to verify that the lowest-density holes are also minima in H I emission. A tabulation
of dust properties for our low-density holes and the Galactic poles appears in Table 5. A


--- Page 32 ---
– 32 –
large region of the Southern Galactic sky (b < −40◦, 160◦< l < 320◦) appears to have
very low dust emission and should therefore have the least foreground contamination for
CMBR studies or large-scale-structure analyses of redshift surveys. Projects in the northern
hemisphere, such as the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and the North Galactic strip of the Two
Degree Field (2dF) survey, may be more compromised by Galactic extinction. In particular,
the North Galactic strip of the 2dF is signiﬁcantly more dusty than their Southern region.
However, the corrections derived from the new dust maps should prove adequate for most
analyses.
In Figure 9, we show the power spectra of intensity ﬂuctuations of the dust map
calculated separately in eight independent patches of sky at high Galactic latitude. For
each hemisphere, we have extracted four quadrants in Galactic latitude bounded by
|b| > 45◦. The power spectra of these high-latitude patches have no preferred scale, but
are reasonably-well described as power laws with P(k) ∝k−2.5. The amplitude of the
power is diﬀerent in each patch, which is indicative of extreme phase-coherence in the cirrus
structure of the Galaxy. To assume that the ﬂuctuations can be approximated as random
phase power is a completely inadequate description of this infrared cirrus, and could lead
to misleading estimates of Galactic foregrounds in CMBR experiments.
7.2.
Diﬀerences between the Dust and H I maps
As seen in Figure 10, the correlation between the dust and the H I emission is
remarkably tight for low ﬂux levels, but has substantial scatter at higher ﬂux levels.
Because the 240µm map is on the Rayleigh-Jeans portion of the dust emission curve, one
might expect it to better correlate with the H I than the 100µm map. We see the opposite
eﬀect: there is more scatter in the 240µm - H I correlation. We attribute this partly to
the considerably larger noise of the 240µm map. But some of this increased scatter is
undoubtedly generated by cool molecular cloud regions, in which much of the hydrogen is in
molecular form, and the 100µm is exponentially reduced because of the lower temperature,
while the 240µm emission is suppressed only linearly with temperature. Furthermore, the
dust-H I scatter is non-negligible even in the regions of low ﬂux, where the gas is expected
to be predominantly neutral. This scatter may indicate either ﬂuctuations in the ionization
fraction of the gas, extensive regions of H+, or variations in the dust-to-gas ratio within
neutral zones.
A ratio map of temperature-corrected dust to the Leiden-Dwingeloo H I map is
shown as Figure 11. The Leiden-Dwingeloo map includes H I gas from the full velocity
range of the survey (−450 ≤vLSR ≤+400 km/s) converted to dust column via the ratio


--- Page 33 ---
– 33 –
0.0122 ( MJy/sr)/( K km/s) found in Table 2. Note that there are ﬂuctuations in the ratio
which are spatially coherent, indicating they are not instrumental noise, but rather real
features on the sky. Most of the high-latitude sky is a neutral grey, while regions of high
dust-to-gas ratio appear as white. The most prominent of these features at high latitudes
must be diﬀuse interstellar molecular clouds as well as regions of saturated H I emission,
such as Orion (l ≈180◦,b ≈−20◦) and Ophiuchus (l ≈0◦, b ≈15◦). The Polaris Flare
(l ≈150◦, b ≈40◦) is very conspicuous. Comparison of Figure 11 to Figure 3 shows that
these regions of high dust-to-gas ratio often coincide with the regions of lower temperature,
which is as expected, since the regions are optically thick in the UV and therefore shielded
from the full ionizing ﬂux of the Galaxy. Although searches for CO have failed to detect an
abundance of molecular gas above the Galactic disk (e.g. Hartmann, Magnani, & Thaddeus
1997), it is very likely that molecular hydrogen is very abundant in these cooler regions
(Spaans & Neufeld 1997).
Regions of low dust-to-gas ratio appear as black. These regions are primarily distant,
high-velocity H I clouds in which the dust, if present, is not as well-illuminated by a UV
radiation ﬁeld, and is therefore too cold to emit at 100µm. The Magellanic Stream is
partially present in the South, while numerous high-velocity clouds are very prominent at
high latitude in the North.
A general gradient of dust-to-gas ratio from Galactic center to anti-center is perhaps
present in the Northern sky, but if present in the Southern sky, the gradient is obscured
by the Orion nebula. Even in the grey, high latitude regions, the dust-to-gas ratio map is
not uniform and exhibits ﬂuctuations of ±15% amplitude that are coherent over scales of
10 degrees. These modulations might indicate real gas to dust variation or they may hint
at some unresolved instrumental problems. For example, three parallel bands in the North
are residuals of the imperfect zodiacal light removal, but their total modulation is only 15%
peak-to-trough.
Figure 12 is a full-sky map of the DIRBE/IRAS reddening estimate minus the BH
estimate, for the region |b| > 10◦. Recall that the BH maps are largely H I maps, with the
zero-point adjusted and with smooth variations in dust-to-gas ratio computed on the basis
of galaxy counts. As expected, apart from an oﬀset, the BH reddening maps are very close
to the new reddening estimates over most high-latitude regions of the sky, rarely diﬀering
by more than 0.02 mag (aside from a global zero-point diﬀerence). But there are large
systematic diﬀerences at low latitude and towards molecular clouds, such as Orion and
Ophiuchus. These modulations largely reﬂect the direct diﬀerences in the dust-to-gas ratio
maps (Figure 11). These coherent modiﬁcations of the reddening estimates are important
for full-sky analyses of the galaxy distribution, particularly for studies of large-scale ﬂow


--- Page 34 ---
– 34 –
ﬁelds.
7.3.
The Reddening at the Galactic Poles
The absolute zero-point of dust column density in the Galaxy is both diﬃcult to
model from 21-cm or infrared emission, and diﬃcult to measure directly from stellar colors.
The zero-point of 21-cm maps are uncertain due to sidelobe contamination of the radio
telescopes. Furthermore, the 21-cm maps completely miss any dust associated with ionized
hydrogen. Although the DIRBE instrument chopped against a cold load to insure a stable
zero point, the zero point of the combined DIRBE/IRAS dust maps are uncertain because
of uncertain zodiacal contamination and a possible isotropic, extragalactic background.
Direct measure of the reddening is an equally diﬃcult task. Extragalactic sources can not
be used because their intrinsic colors are not known. Studies of Galactic sources are limited
to calibration of the dust column density between local and halo stars. Such comparisons
may suﬀer from selection eﬀects, and do not sample Galactic dust beyond a few hundred
parsecs.
The debate as to the reddening zero-point has traditionally focused on the values at
the Galactic poles. Although we ﬁnd the absolute minima in the dust column are not
at the poles (see Table 5), most studies are near these two lines-of-sight. Some authors
have claimed that the Galactic poles are essentially free of reddening, whereas others
claim a reddening of order E(B−V ) ≈0.02 −0.05 mag, corresponding to an extinction
A(B) ≈0.1 −0.2 mag. This debate was reviewed by Burstein & Heiles in 1982, and has yet
to be resolved.
Several large studies have been conducted to measure the colors of A and F stars
near the Galactic poles. Color excesses from ubvβy photometry for these stars with
well-known, intrinsic colors is used to measure E(b−y) reddening. Most of these studies
argue for E(B−V ) <∼0.01 mag. The data of Hilditch, Hill, & Barnes (1983) yield an
average E(B−V ) = 0.011 mag for 34 stars at b > 75◦and more than 200 pc above
the plane. Furthermore, the subset of these stars in the quadrant 90 < l < 180◦show
E(B−V ) = 0.000 mag. A similar northern hemisphere study by Perry & Johnston (1982)
is used to argue for negligible reddening for stars within 200 pc distance towards the NGP.
In a companion study in the southern hemisphere, Perry & Christodoulou (1996) ﬁnd
E(B−V ) = −0.010 ± 0.016 mag for 73 stars within 15◦of the SGP. A reanalysis of some
of these data by Teerikorpi (1990) argues these result are subject to statistical biases,
suggesting that the average reddening reaches E(B−V ) = 0.04 mag at 400 pc above the
Galactic plane.


--- Page 35 ---
– 35 –
Our estimated reddening, averaged over 10◦in diameter, is E(B−V ) = 0.015 mag
at the NGP and E(B−V ) = 0.018 mag at the SGP. This corresponds to a blue-band
extinction of A(B) = 0.065 (0.080 mag) at the NGP (SGP), using an RV = 3.1 extinction
law. We believe that a nonzero reddening at the poles is compelling for several reasons.
First of all, we observe both 100µm emission and H I emission at the poles, not all of which
could be scattered light or zodiacal emission since it is structured and not entirely smooth
at either pole. The fact that a linear dust-to-H I regression ﬁts so well through all the low
ﬂux regions suggests that this is truly material in the ISM. The gas has low velocity so it
is certainly part of the Milky Way, and so therefore must be the dust. If the A and F star
reddenings are not biased by selection eﬀects, then this gas and dust must be more than
several hundred parsecs above the Galactic plane.
It is theoretically unreasonable for the dust at high Galactic latitude to have fully
evaporated. Although the dust at the poles might have been preferentially ablated by
the shocks which formed the Local Bubble, such ablation would generally be expected to
act oppositely to the coagulation that occurs in dense molecular regions. The grain size
distribution should tip further toward smaller grains, thereby lowering the value of RV but
not eliminating the small grains which dominate UV and optical extinction.
For many analyses, a change in the zero-point of dust reddening is irrelevant. But for
studies such as photometry of distant supernovae, such an eﬀect is quite important, and its
neglect will lead to a systematic errors in the inferred q0. This arises because the extinction
is not grey, and more strongly aﬀects the B- or V-band spectra of nearby SNe than the R-
or I-band spectra of distant SNe.
An oﬀset is readily apparent between the DIRBE/IRAS reddening maps and
those of Burstein & Heiles. We measure a median diﬀerence of 0.020 mag in E(B−V )
between the maps at high Galactic latitudes (|b| > 45◦), in the sense that the BH maps
are systematically lower. For the reasons stated above, we believe the DIRBE/IRAS
zero-point to be more reliable. If one were to shift the DIRBE/IRAS maps down by
0.020 mag, the lowest column-density holes would have unphysical, negative reddenings of
E(B−V ) = −0.015 mag.
7.4.
Measurement of the CIB
The search for the signature of an Extragalactic Background Light (EBL) has a long
history (Peebles 1971; Bond, Carr, & Hogan 1986; Bond, Carr, & Hogan 1991; Zepf & Silk
1996; Guiderdoni et al. 1997; Franceschini et al. 1997). Such a background is inevitable and


--- Page 36 ---
– 36 –
can be estimated based upon a star formation history, and the corresponding injection of
energy and metals into the interstellar medium at various epochs. The predicted EBL can
be expressed as
νIν = 0.007ρBc2(∆Z)(c/4π)(1 + zf)−1,
(25)
where ρB is the present baryon density and ∆Z is the overall metallicity produced at
redshift zf (Bond, Carr, & Hogan 1986). For ΩBh2 = 0.025 and ∆Z = 0.02, this yields
νIν = 37/(1 + zf) nW/m2/sr. A high background ﬂux thus favors substantial metal
production at low redshift. The emergent ﬂux will appear either in the UV/visible/near-IR
window if the star formation is not very dusty, or will appear in the 100 −300µm window if
the majority of the light in star forming regions is reprocessed by dust.
In the discussion of Section 2.3 above, we described our regression of the dust maps
on the H I data while removing the zodiacal foreground and a constant background term.
Table 3 lists the derived background coeﬃcients, Bb, in MJy/sr, as a function of the
limiting ecliptic latitude cut |β|. Note from this table that the inferred Bb values drop as
the ﬁts are extended to lower values of |β|. This results from the inadequacy of the linear
model for zodiacal foreground removal, especially for the 100µm data. But for ﬁts with
|β| > 20◦, the 140µm and 240µm ﬁts stabilize and are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The
error bars are dominated by the large covariance between the measurement of Bb and Ab,
which becomes very extreme at large |β| cuts. The error bars listed are the 95% conﬁdence
intervals, not including systematic eﬀects. From variations of these results with ecliptic
latitude cuts, and from simulations with mock IPD maps, we estimate that systematic
errors are comparable to the tabulated, formal errors: 0.5, 0.2, and 0.2 MJy/sr at 100, 140,
and 240µm, respectively.
Based on these ﬁts, we conclude that there does exist a well-quantiﬁed uniform
background radiation at 140µm and 240µm. We prefer to use the coeﬃcients derived from
|β| > 30◦as the best compromise between an inadequate model at low |β| and insuﬃcient
modelling leverage at high |β|. Our results are similar, although slightly higher, than those
reported previously by Boulanger et al.(1996). The only signiﬁcant diﬀerence between
our procedure and that of Boulanger et al. is that we ﬁt all terms of the linear regression
simultaneously. In perhaps more convenient units, a surface brightness of 1.0 MJy/sr
translates to νIν = 30, 20, and 12 nW/m2/sr at 100µm, 140µm, and 240µm, respectively.
The derived ﬂuxes from Table 3 thus translate to an upper limit of 15 nW/m2/sr at 100µm,
and detected ﬂux of 32 ± 13 nW/m2/sr at 140µm, and 17 ± 4 nW/m2/sr at 240µm, where
we have included the estimated, systematic error.
We suspect that this isotropic ﬂux is either extragalactic or is some sort of foreground
directly related to the DIRBE telescope. No Galactic source is likely to be isotropic. We


--- Page 37 ---
– 37 –
detect no hint of a dust layer distributed like csc |b| that is uncorrelated with the H I
distribution, as might be expected from a uniform disk of ionized gas. Since these results
derive from comparison to the H I distribution, they are sensitive to unknown oﬀsets in the
H I-dust relation. We have assumed that the Galactic H I-to-dust relationship has no zero
oﬀset, which leads us to more reddening than predicted by the BH maps. If we force our
mean high latitude reddening to match the BH maps, then the inferred CIB would increase.
A possible instrumental explanation for the strong signature at 140µm and 240µm is
given by Hauser (1996). Although the entire DIRBE telescope was operated at 2 K, which
should minimize radiation by the telescope mimicking an isotropic background, in these two
channels there is a measurable radiative oﬀset induced by JFETs, operating at 70K, used
to amplify the detector signals. Uncertainty in the correction for this eﬀect is estimated to
be 5 (2) nW/m2/sr at 140 (240) µm (Fixsen et al. 1997), which is considerably less than
the signal we measure.
Presuming this ﬂux is indeed a cosmic infrared background, the inferred value is
somewhat above that expected from the integrated star formation and dust reprocessing
history of high redshift galaxies, even if they are shrouded in dust (Guiderdoni et al. 1997).
The measured background is four times larger than that expected based on an empirical
summation of the observed luminosity density of galaxies (Malkan & Stecker 1997). The
numbers we measure might be consistent with a strong burst of massive star formation
in elliptical galaxies, if they are suﬃciently dusty (Zepf & Silk 1996). Puget et al. (1996)
report an isotropic background detection from analysis of COBE/FIRAS data in the
400-1000µm region, and our background measurements appear to be on the high side of the
extrapolation of their measurements.
The EBL derived from the optical ﬂuxes in the Hubble Deep Field (HDF), with
modest extrapolation of the galaxy counts, is approximately 7.5 nW/m2/sr (Madau 1997),
a factor of ∼2 smaller than that reported here. After masking detected sources in the
HDF, Vogeley (1997) has shown that the remaining EBL, unless it is truly uniform, has
a surface brightness that is at most a small fraction of the integrated light of the discrete
sources. These results, together with recent observations of the UV continuum slope at high
z (Pettini et al. 1997), suggest that much early star formation was very dust-enshrouded,
reprocessing most of the UV, optical and near-IR photons to the far-infrared. An integrated
far-IR background ﬂux of such a magnitude, if correct, is a very promising sign for high
angular-resolution studies of the far-infrared. Space missions such as FIRST and ISO, and
ground-based submillimeter observations with SCUBA on the JCMT and with the MMA
will have a tremendous opportunity to resolve this background, or to demonstrate that it
does not actually exist.


--- Page 38 ---
– 38 –
A more detailed analysis of the CIB is currently underway by the DIRBE team
(Hauser et al. 1998; Kelsall et al. 1998; Arendt et al. 1998; Dwek et al. 1998). Instead of
our simple, empirical model of the zodiacal foreground, they have solved for a detailed
three-dimensional model of the interplanetary dust. They provide a much more complete
analysis of the separation of Galactic emission from the infrared background, and their
results will undoubtedly supersede the preliminary measurements reported here.
8.
Summary
We have constructed a full-sky map of the Galactic dust based upon its far-infrared
emission. The IRAS experiment provides high angular resolution at 100µm, whereas the
DIRBE experiment provides the absolute calibration necessary across several passbands
to map the dust color temperature and convert 100µm emission to dust column density.
Point sources and extragalactic sources have been removed, leaving a map of the infrared
cirrus. This dust map is normalized to E(B−V ) reddening using the colors of background
galaxies. The ﬁnal maps have a resolution of 6.1′, and are shown to predict reddening with
an accuracy of 16%.
The new dust map leads to reddening estimates quite consistent with the Burstein-
Heiles maps in most regions of the sky, with the new maps proving to be twice as reliable.
These new maps are certainly to be preferred in regions of high extinction, where H I-based
maps suﬀer from saturation of the 21-cm line or insensitivity to molecular hydrogen.
Further tests are encouraged to determine the accuracy of our predicted reddenings and
extinction. In particular, the accuracy of the maps at |b| < 10◦has yet to be established.
The maps will undoubtedly prove useful for analyses of current and future CMBR
experiments, as well as a host of Galactic structure studies. For example, it will be of
interest to determine whether the temperature variations observed at high latitude are
consistent with molecular line observations, and whether better constraints on the distance
to the high latitude molecular clouds can be obtained. Molecular line observations of several
of the regions of low dust-to-H I ratio (i.e., the high velocity clouds) will give information
on the metal abundance in these regions, which might lead to better constraints on their
distance from the plane of the Milky Way.
We show that the dust correlates very well with the available H I maps over most of
the sky. The ratio of dust-to-gas can be used to ﬂag molecular clouds on one extreme, and
high velocity H I clouds on the other. We note that the lowest regions of dust emission
occur in the Southern Galactic sky, in a region where there exist no high-quality H I maps.


--- Page 39 ---
– 39 –
The South Galactic sky has less power in the dust, and should be preferred for CMBR
experiments and large-scale galaxy surveys.
We argue that Burstein & Heiles (1982) underestimate reddening by 0.020 mag in
E(B−V ). Our predicted extinction at the Galactic poles is A(B) = 0.065 mag (North)
and A(B) = 0.080 mag (South) on 10◦scales. There do exist holes that have extinction as
low as A(B) = 0.02 mag; the most prominent of these are listed in Table 5. We ﬁnd the
lowest-column-density dust holes are in the Southern Galactic sky, but it is not known if
these are also the regions of lowest H I. If these selected regions are indeed low in H I, then
they should become preferred directions for deep imaging and spectroscopy of extragalactic
sources in the soft X-ray bands, where Galactic extinction is a severe problem.
In the process of generating these maps and removing the zodiacal foreground, we
have detected what appears to be a signiﬁcant far-IR background ﬂux, approximately 32
and 17 nW/m2/sr in the 140µm and 240µm bands respectively. This ﬂux is surprisingly
high, higher than the integrated light seen in the Hubble Deep Field. If our measurement
is a detection of the CIB and not some artifact associated with the DIRBE telescope, this
suggests that early star formation was heavily dust shrouded in most of the Universe.
The dust maps are publicly available, as described in Appendix C.
9.
Acknowledgments
The COBE data sets were developed by the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center under
the guidance of the COBE Science Working Group and were provided by the NSSDC. We
thank Sherry Wheelock of IPAC for providing us with ISSA coverage maps. We thank Steve
Maddox for supplying the APM maps, Will Saunders and the PSCZ team for providing
positions and identiﬁcations from the PSCZ survey, and Tod Lauer for providing the BCG
data. We are especially indebted to Carl Heiles for stimulating discussions and invaluable
guidance during the course of this project. Further discussions with Dave Burstein and
Chris McKee were extremely useful. All the analysis described in this paper was performed
in IDL, which increased our eﬃciency by an enormous factor. DPF was partially supported
by an NSF Graduate Fellowship. This work was supported in part by NASA grant
NAG5-1360.


--- Page 40 ---
– 40 –
A.
Remaining Stellar Contamination
Stars have been removed from our map to a ﬂux level of f100 ≈0.3 Jy (Section 4.3).
At 100µm, these sources contribute a total of 26, 700 Jy at |b| > 5◦, amounting to a mean
ﬂux density of 0.0026 MJy/sr. With a median star color of f100/f60 = 0.4, our adopted ﬂux
cut at 60µm roughly corresponds to f100 > 0.3 Jy. Stars just below this limit have a peak
ﬂux density of ∼0.03 MJy/sr at 100µm, corresponding to A(B) ≈0.003 mag. Thus, the
contamination from remaining, individual stars is very small in the ﬁnal extinction maps.
The concern about remaining contamination from stars is that, although small on
average, it may increase dramatically at low Galactic latitudes where the star density is
very high. We show that this is not a problem, by extrapolating to the contribution from
stars below our ﬂux limit. In order to trace the star counts to low ﬂux and low Galactic
latitude, we restrict this analysis to a strict color cut which limits cirrus confusion:
1. 0.1 < f60/f25 < 0.3
2. 0.03 < f60/f12 < 0.15
3. f100/f60 < 2
This strict color cut retains 70% of the stars, while eﬃciently excluding the cirrus. The
color-color plane in Figure 13 compares this strict color cut to the looser cut, f 2
60 < f12f25.
The distribution of stars (satisfying this strict color cut) as a function of ﬂux is ﬁt by
∆log N = 2.37 −0.84(∆log f60/0.1).
(A1)
With a slope in the range −1 < m < 0, the number of stars at faint ﬂux levels diverges,
but the ﬂux from those sources converges. This allows us to normalize the ﬂux from stars
fainter than a given ﬂux cut, fcut, relative to the number of stars brighter than that cut:
Flux of stars < fcut
Number of stars > fcut
=
 −m
1 + m
 fcut
Jy .
(A2)
For a ﬂux cut fcut = 0.6 Jy, this ratio is 3.2 Jy−1. As the number of stars must converge,
this ratio represents an upper limit to the ﬂux from faint stars. Next, we trace the
distribution of stars as a function of Galactic latitude. Again to minimize cirrus confusion,
we limit ourselves to the strict color cut and brighter stars (f60 > 1.2 Jy). The distribution
of stars roughly corresponds to a csc |b| law for |b| > 10◦. At lower latitudes, the PSC is
losing stars primarily due to confusion with cirrus. At |b| = 10◦, the cirrus has a surface
density that is typically 17 times brighter than a 1.2 Jy point source in the ISSA 60µm
maps.


--- Page 41 ---
– 41 –
We combine the ﬂux and latitude distribution of stars to estimate the contamination
from faint stars. Using a mean color for stars of f100/f60 = 0.54, we plot the estimated
contribution from stars fainter than f60 = 0.6 Jy in the 100µm maps (Figure 14). The
contamination is approximated by the functional form
F100 = 2 × 10−4 csc |b| MJy/sr.
(A3)
For comparison, we overplot the total 100µm ﬂux from the PSC stars explicitly removed
from the maps. This demonstrates that the faint stars are expected to contaminate the
100µm maps at a level less than 0.01 MJy/sr for |b| > 5◦. This is not signiﬁcant, as it
represents contamination in derived A(B) values of less than 10−3 mag.
B.
Extinction in Diﬀerent Bandpasses
We have shown that the DIRBE/IRAS dust maps faithfully trace the dust responsible
for reddening of blue light (Section 5). We need some method of extrapolating the
reddening in (B−V ) to reddening and extinction in other passbands. Measuring such
relative extinctions is a well-developed industry, albeit one still fraught with some
controversy. In particular, the composition of interstellar dust is not well known, nor its
variation within the Galaxy.
The selective extinction is variable across optical passbands. This extinction curve is
usually parametrized in terms of the V-band extinction, A(V ), and a measure of the relative
extinction between B- and V-band,
RV =
A(V )
A(V ) −A(B) ≡
A(V )
E(B−V ).
(B1)
The value of RV varies from 2.6 to 5.5 in the measurements of Clayton & Cardelli (1988),
with a mean value of 3.1 in the diﬀuse ISM. High density regions are presumed to have
larger values of RV as grains coagulate into larger grains that are relatively grey absorbers
(Draine & Anderson 1985; Guhathakurta & Draine 1989; Kim & Martin 1995). This
variation is certainly a source of concern, as the extinction curves vary signiﬁcantly in
blue passbands for diﬀerent values of RV . These variations can be well-represented by the
same two-parameter function in any region of the Galaxy. We use the functional form of
O’Donnell (1994) in the optical and Cardelli, Clayton, & Mathis (1989) in the ultraviolet
and infrared. The extinction curve is nearly the same at λ > 8000 ˚A for all values of RV ,
with deviations of up to 30% in V-band and 55% in B-band.
Fortunately, the observational evidence favors a single extinction curve for most
diﬀuse clouds in the Galaxy, with RV ≈3.1. Even including stars in dense clouds, the


--- Page 42 ---
– 42 –
76 measurements of stars from Clayton & Cardelli show a dispersion of 0.7 in RV . This
translates into a scatter of only 10% in A(B)/A(∞) and 6% in A(V )/A(∞). Surprisingly,
Kenyon, Dobrzycka & Hartmann (1994) ﬁnd agreement with an RV = 3.1 extinction curve
for stars in the heavily-reddened Taurus-Auriga cloud. Rieke & Lebofsky (1984) have shown
the extinction curve to be valid at wavelengths 1 < λ < 13µm.
The extinction in each passband b, ∆mb, is evaluated for an extinction in the V
passband, δmV :
∆mb = −2.5 log
"R dλ Wb(λ) S(λ) 10−(Aλ∆mV /2.5)
R dλ Wb(λ) S(λ)
#
.
(B2)
The system response, in terms of quantum eﬃciency, is represented by W(λ), and S(λ) is
the photon luminosity of the source. As we have normalized the dust maps to the reddening
of elliptical galaxies, we use an elliptical galaxy for the source. We average the normal
elliptical galaxy SEDs from Kennicutt (1992), extrapolating the source as S(λ) ∝λ outside
his range of spectral coverage. The above expression has been evaluated for a variety of
passbands in the limit of low extinction (∆mV →0), then re-scaled to A(V ) = 1.
The system response is the convolution of the atmosphere, telescope optics, ﬁlter and
detector responses. Where possible, we have chosen the system responses that correspond
to the commonly-used standard stars for each ﬁlter. A photo-electric Cousins UBV RKCIKC
system is represented by the ﬁlter responses published by Landolt (1992) convolved with the
quantum eﬃciency of the RCA 3103A photomultiplier and the atmospheric transparency at
Cerro Tololo. A CCD Cousins UBV RKCIKC system is represented by the ﬁlter responses
of the CTIO TEK#2 ﬁlter set, convolved with their Tek2K CCD Q.E. and the atmosphere
at Cerro Tololo. The Stromgren ubvβy system matches the ﬁlter curves published by
Crawford & Barnes (1970), convolved with a Tek2K CCD Q.E. and the atmosphere at Kitt
Peak. The Gunn griz system matches the ﬁlter curves published by Schneider, Gunn, &
Hoessel (1983), convolved with the atmosphere at Palomar. The Spinrad night-sky ﬁlter,
RS, has been widely used at Lick Observatory, and is convolved with the Orbit 2K Q.E.
and the atmosphere at Lick. The infrared JHKL′ bands are represented by the IRCAM3
ﬁlter set at UKIRT, convolved with the atmosphere at Mauna Kea. The u′g′r′i′z′ ﬁlter set
for the Sloan Sky Survey represent the total system response at Apache Point as published
by Fukugita et al. (1996). The total system response for some of the broad-band ﬁlters for
WFPC2 were taken from the Space Telescope Science Institute web page. The photographic
responses for the Second Generation Digitized Sky Survey are from Weir, Djorgovski, &
Fayyad (1995), convolved with the atmosphere at Palomar.
The bJ passband used for the APM maps has an unusual deﬁnition and is treated
diﬀerently. The APM maps were calibrated with CCD photometry using the following


--- Page 43 ---
– 43 –
deﬁnition (Maddox et al. 1990):
bJ ≡B −0.28(B−V ).
(B3)
Combining equations B2 and B3, one can show the following to be rigorously true:
A(bJ) = 0.72A(B) + 0.28A(V ).
(B4)
The results for all passbands appear in Table 6. The eﬀective wavelength, λeﬀ,
represents that wavelength on the extinction curve with the same extinction as the full
passband. The ﬁnal column normalizes the extinction to photo-electric measurements of
E(B−V ). Assuming an RV = 3.1 dust model, the dust maps should be multiplied by the
value in this column to determine the extinction in a given passband. Extinctions in narrow
passbands can be determined by evaluating the Cardelli et al. or O’Donnell extinction law
at the corresponding wavelength.
C.
Data Presentation
The 100µm map and the dust map are available electronically. Both maps consist of
the destriped, de-glitched ISSA data recalibrated to DIRBE and point-source subtracted.
The 100µm map maps the emission in units of MJy/sr. The dust map applies our
temperature-correction to convert 100µm emission to column density of dust, calibrated
to E(B−V ) reddening in magnitudes. Reddenings and extinctions in other passbands are
computed by multiplication with the numbers in Table 6.
All maps are stored as FITS ﬁles, in pairs of 4096 × 4096 pixel Lambert projections.
The NGP projection covers the northern Galactic hemisphere, centered at b = +90◦, with
latitude running clockwise. The SGP projection covers the southern Galactic hemisphere,
centered at b = −90◦, with latitude running counter-clockwise. (Note that Figures 3, 8, 11,
and 12 show the SGP projections rotated by 180◦.) Galactic coordinates (l, b) are converted
to pixel positions (x, y) via
x = 2048
q
1 −n sin (b) cos (l) + 2047.5
(C1)
y = −2048n
q
1 −n sin (b) sin (l) + 2047.5
(C2)
where n = +1 for the NGP, and n = −1 for the SGP. Pixel numbers are zero-indexed, with
the center of the lower left pixel having position (x, y) = (0, 0). These Lambert projections
are minimally distorted at high Galactic latitudes, with the distortion approaching 40% at
b = 0◦. The pixel size of (2.372′)2 well-samples the FWHM of 6.1′.


--- Page 44 ---
– 44 –
The caveats to using these maps to measure reddening or extinction can be summarized
as follows:
• Every eﬀort has been made to remove both extragalactic sources and unresolved
(Galactic) sources from the dust maps at |b| > 5◦, and unconfused regions at lower
latitudes. Some sources will remain owing to confusion or unusual FIR colors. No
sources fainter than 0.6 Jy at 60µm are removed, although these are not signiﬁcant
contaminants.
• The IRAS satellite did not scan a strip amounting to 3% of the sky. In addition,
we remove a circle of radius 2◦centered at (l, b) = (326.28◦, +51.66◦) contaminated
by Saturn. These regions are replaced with DIRBE data, and have no point sources
removed.
• The 100µm passband for the DIRBE satellite is somewhat diﬀerent than the 100µm
passband on IRAS. For a 20 K blackbody, the diﬀerence is small, but the color
temperature of sources is sometimes very diﬀerent than that of the cirrus. This
sometimes results in artifacts in the temperature-correction term (on scales of one
degree). Our remedy is described in Section 3.3.
• The LMC, SMC and M31 are not removed from the maps, nor are sources within their
Holmberg radius. Accurate reddenings through these galaxies is not possible since
their temperature structure is not suﬃciently resolved by DIRBE. Typical reddenings
towards these galaxies is estimated from the median dust emission in surrounding
annuli: E(B−V ) = 0.075 mag for the LMC, 0.037 mag for the SMC, and 0.062 mag
for M 31.
• At low Galactic latitudes (|b| < 5◦), most contaminating sources have not been
removed from the maps, and the temperature structure of the Galaxy is not well
resolved. Furthermore, no comparisons between our predicted reddenings and
observed reddening have been made in these regions. Thus, our predicted reddenings
here should not be trusted, though inspection of the maps might be of some use.
• The normalization of the dust column density to reddening has a formal uncertainty
of 10%.
• Should one wish to change the DIRBE/IRAS dust zero-point to be consistent with
the Burstein-Heiles maps, we suggest subtracting 0.020 mag in E(B−V ).
The reddening maps will be available in the CD-ROM series of the AAS, or from
the web site http://astro.berkeley.edu/davis/dust/index.html. Mask ﬁles are also


--- Page 45 ---
– 45 –
available that contain the most important processing steps for any given position on the
sky. Further details will be available with the data ﬁles.


--- Page 46 ---
– 46 –
REFERENCES
Arendt, R. G. et al. 1998, in preparation
Bessel, M. S. 1990, PASP, 102, 1181
Boggess, N. W. et al. 1992, ApJ, 397, 420
Bond, J. R., Carr, B. J., & Hogan, C. J. 1991, ApJ, 367, 420
Bond, J. R., Carr, B. J., & Hogan, C. J. 1986, ApJ, 306, 428
Boulanger, F., Abergel, A, Bernard, J. P., Burton W. B., Desert, F. X., Hartmann, D.,
Lagache, G., & Puget, J. L. 1996, A&A, 312, 256
Burstein, D., & Heiles, C. 1978, ApJ, 225, 40 [BH]
Burstein, D., & Heiles, C. 1982, AJ, 87, 1165
Burstein, D., Davies, R. L., Dressler, A., Faber, S. M., Stone, R. P. S., Lynden-Bell, D.,
Terlevich, R. J., & Wegner, G. 1987, ApJ, 64, 601
Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G. C., & Mathis, J. S. 1989, ApJ, 345, 245
Cao, Y., Prince, T. A., Tereby, S., & Beichman, C. A. 1996, PASP, 108, 535
Chan, F. K., & O’Neill, E. M. 1975, “Feasibility Study of a Quadrilaterized Spherical Cube
Earth Data Base”, Computer Sciences Corp., March 1975, EPRF Technical Report
2-75 (CSC)
Clayton, G. C., & Cardelli, J. A. 1988, AJ, 96, 695
COBE Diﬀuse Infrared Background Experiment (DIRBE) Explanatory Supplement, ed. M.
G. Hauser, T. Kelsall, D. Leisawitz, & Weiland, J. 1995, COBE Ref. Pub. No. 95-A
(Greenbelt, MD: NASA/GSFC), available from the NSSDC
Crawford, D. L., & Barnes, J. V. 1970, ApJ, 75, 978
de Oliveira-Costa, A., Kogut, A., Devlin, M., Netterﬁeld, C. B., Page, L. A., & Wollack E.
J. 1997, ApJ, 482, L17
de Vaucouleurs, G. et al. 1991, “Third Reference Catalogue of Bright Galaxies” (New York:
Springer-Verlag) [RC3]
Draine, B. T., & Lee, H. M. 1984, ApJ, 285, 89


--- Page 47 ---
– 47 –
Draine, B. T., & Anderson, N. 1985, ApJ, 292, 494
Draine, B. T., & Lazarian, A. 1997, preprint astro-ph/9710152
Dwek, E. et al. 1998, in preparation
Efstathiou, G., Bond, J. R. & White, S. D. M. 1992, MNRAS, 258, 1
Faber S. M., Wegner G., Burstein D., Davies R. L., Dressler A., Lynden-Bell D., Terlevich
R. J. 1989, ApJS, 69, 763
Finkbeiner, D. P., Schlegel, D. J., & Davis, M. 1997, in preparation
Fisher, K. B. 1992, Ph.D. Thesis, University of California at Berkeley
Fisher, K. B., Huchra, J. P., Strauss, M. A., Davis, M., Yahil, A., & Schlegel, D. 1995,
ApJS, 100, 69
Fixsen, D. J. et al. 1997, ApJ, 490, 482
Franceschini, A., Aussel, H., Bressan, A., Cesarsky, C. J., Danese, L., De Zotti, G., Elbaz,
D., Granato, G. L., Mazzei, P., & Silva, L. 1997, preprint astro-ph/9707080
Fukugita, M., Ichikawa, T., Gunn, J. E., Doi, M., Shimasaku, K., & Schneider, D. P. 1996,
AJ, 111, 1748
Gaustad, J. E., McCullough, P. R., & Van Buren, D. 1996, PASP, 108, 351
Guhathakurta, P., & Draine, B. T. 1989, ApJ, 345, 230
Guiderdoni, B., Bouchet, F. R., Puget, J. L., Lagache, G., & Hivon, E. 1997, preprint
astro-ph/9706095
Hartmann, D., & Burton, W. B. 1997, Atlas of Galactic Neutral Hydrogen (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press)
Hartmann, D., Magnani, L., & Thaddeus, P. 1997, preprint
Hauser, M. 1996, in “Unveiling the Cosmic IR Background”, ed. E. Dwek, AIP Conference
Proceedings, Vol. 348, 11
Hauser, M., et al. 1998, in preparation
Herbstmeier, U., Heithausen, A., & Mebold, U. 1993, A&A, 272, 514


--- Page 48 ---
– 48 –
Hilditch, R. W., Hill, G., & Barnes, J. V. 1983, MNRAS, 204, 241
IRAS Catalogs and Atlases: Explanatory Supplement 1988, eds. Beichman, C. A.,
Neugebauer, G., Habing, H. J., Clegg, P. E., & Chester, T. J. (Washington, D.C.:
U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce)
IRAS Point Source Catalog, Version 2. 1988, Joint IRAS Science Working Group
(Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce)
Jaﬀe, A. H., Finkbeiner, D. P., Bond, J. R. 1998, in preparation
Kelsall, T. et al. 1998, in preparation
Kennicutt, R.C. 1992, ApJS, 79, 255
Kenyon, S. J., Dobrzycka, D., & Hartmann, L. 1994, AJ, 108, 1872
Kim, H., & Martin, P. 1995, ApJ, 462, 296
Knude, J. 1996, A&A, 306, 108
Kogut, A., Banday, A. J., Bennett, C. L., Gorski, K. M., Hinshaw, G., & Reach, W. T
1996, ApJ, 460, 1
Landolt, A. U. 1992, AJ, 104, 340
Leitch, E. M., Readhead, A., Pearson, T., & Myers, S. 1997, preprint astro-ph/9705241
Lockman, F. J., Jahoda, K., & McCammon, D. 1986, ApJ, 302, 432
Low, F. J. et al. 1984, ApJ, 278, L19
McFadzean, A. D., Hilditch, R. W., & Hill, G. 1983, MNRAS, 205, 525
Madau, P. 1997, preprint astro-ph/9709147
Magnani, L., Blitz, L., & Mundy, L. 1985, ApJ,295,402
Maddox, S. J., Efstathiou, G., & Sutherland, W. J. 1990, MNRAS, 246, 433
Malkan, M. A., & Stecker, F. W. 1997, preprint astro-ph/9710072
Mathis, J. S., & Cardelli, J. A. 1992, ApJ, 398, 610
Mebold, U., Cernicharo, J., Velden, L., Reif, K., Crezelius, C., & Goerigk, W. 1985, A&A,
151, 427


--- Page 49 ---
– 49 –
Nandy, K., Thompson, G. I., Jamar, C., Monﬁls, A., & Wilson, R. 1975, A&A, 44, 195
National Space Science Data Center, accessible via the World Wide Web at
“http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/astro/astro home.html” [NSSDC]
Neugebauer, G. et al. 1984, ApJ, 278, L1
O’Donnell, J. E. 1994, ApJ, 422, 1580
Oke, J. B. & Sandage, A. 1968, ApJ, 154, 21
Peebles, P. J. E. 1971, Physical Cosmology (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press), 59
Perry, C. L., & Christodoulou, D. M. 1996, PASP, 108, 772
Perry, C. L., & Johnston, L. 1982, ApJS, 50, 451
Pettini, M., Steidel, C. C., Adelberger, K. L., Kellogg, M., Dickinson, M., & Giavalisco, M.
1997, preprint astro-ph/9708117
Postman, M., & Lauer, T. R. 1995, ApJ, 440, 28
Puget, J. L. et al. 1996, A&A, 308, L5
Reach, W. T. 1995, private communication
Reach, W. T. et al. 1995, ApJ, 451, 188
Reach, W. T. et al. 1996, A&A, 315, 381
Reach, W. T. 1997, in preparation
Reynolds, R. J. 1990, “The Interstellar Disk-Halo Connection in Galaxies”, IAU Symposium
No. 144, ed. H. Bloeman, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 67
Reynolds, R. J., Tufte, S. L., Kung, D. T., McCullough, P. R., & Heiles, C. 1995, ApJ, 448,
715
Rice, W. et al. 1988, ApJS, 68, 91
Rieke, G. H., & Lebofsky, M. J. 1984, ApJ, 288, 618
Rowan-Robinson, M., Jones, M., Leech, K., Vedi, K., & Hughes, J. 1991, MNRAS, 249, 729
Saunders, W. 1997, private communication


--- Page 50 ---
– 50 –
Schlegel, D. J. 1995, Ph.D. Thesis, University of California at Berkeley
Schneider, D. P., Gunn, J. E., & Hoessel, J. G. 1983, ApJ, 264, 337
Simonetti, J. H., Dennison, B., & Topsana, G. A. 1996, ApJ, 458, L1
Sodroski, T. J., Odegard, N., Arendt, R. G., Dwek, E., Weiland, J. L., Hauser, M. G., &
Kelsall, T. 1997, ApJ, 480, 173
Spaans, M., & Neufeld, D. A. 1997, ApJ, 484, 785
Stark, A. A., Gammie, C. F., Wilson, R. W., Bally, J., Linke, R. A., Heiles, C., & Hurwitz,
M. 1992, ApJS, 79, 77
Strauss, M. A. 1989, Ph.D. Thesis, University of California at Berkeley
Strauss, M. A., Davis, M., & Huchra, J. P. 1990, ApJ, 361, 49
Strauss, M. A., Huchra, J. P., Davis, M., Yahil, A., Fisher, K., & Tonry, J. 1992, ApJS, 83,
29
Teerikorpi, P. 1990, A&A, 235, 362
Tully, R. B., & Fisher, J. R. 1977, A&A, 54, 661
Vogeley, M. 1997, preprint astro-ph/9711209
Weir, N., Djorgovski, S., & Fayyad, U. M. 1995, AJ, 110, 1
Wheelock, S. L. et al. 1994, IRAS Sky Survey Atlas: Explanatory Supplement, JPL
Publication 94-11 (Pasadena: JPL)
Witt, A. N. & Lillie, C. F. 1973, A&A, 25, 397
Zepf, S. E., & Silk, J. 1996, ApJ, 466, 114
This preprint was prepared with the AAS LATEX macros v4.0.


--- Page 51 ---
– 51 –
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
4
6
8
10
12
D 
100 [MJy/Sr]
(a) No correction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
2
4
6
DL
100 [MJy/Sr]
(b) Linear correction
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Dwingeloo HI [K km/s]
0
2
4
6
DQ
100 [MJy/Sr]
(c) Quadratic correction
Fig. 1.— The 100µm-H I correlation with (a) no correction, (b) linear correction, and (c)
quadratic correction for zodiacal contamination. The ﬁts in the range [0, 200] K km/s are
shown as solid lines.


--- Page 52 ---
– 52 –
Fig. 2.— Ratio of recovered versus true column density of dust using a single-temperature
ﬁt to two components. A fraction of dust, fB, at temperature TB is added to 18 K dust.
The recovered column density is always lower than the true column density, with contours
spaced in units of 0.1.
THIS FIGURE AVAILABLE at http://astro.berkeley.edu/davis/dust/index.html
Fig. 3.— Temperature map as determined with an α = 2 emissivity model. These Lambert
projections are centered on the NGP (top), and SGP (bottom), with Galactic latitude
labelled in degrees. Lines of constant latitude and longitude are spaced every 30 degrees.
Note the cool molecular cloud regions and the hot star-forming regions.
THIS FIGURE AVAILABLE at http://astro.berkeley.edu/davis/dust/index.html
Fig.
4.— Fourier destriping of plate 379: (a) raw ISSA HCON-0 image, (b) FFT with
wavenumber 0 in center, (c) destriped image, (d) FFT of destriped image. Note that one
of the kθ bins contains less power than the rest. These are modes in which power from
HCON-3 has replaced power in the other HCONs; however HCON-3 covers only half the
plate, resulting in less power.


--- Page 53 ---
– 53 –
1
10
100
deg-1
1
Pk(destripe)/Pk(raw)
Fig. 5.— Ratio of power in destriped ISSA image versus power in raw image. Ratios for
four arbitrary plates are shown (plate numbers 199, 216, 217 and 379).


--- Page 54 ---
– 54 –
Fig.
6.— Residuals from the (B−V ) vs. Mg2 regression, plotted against foreground
reddening, for (a) the BH maps and (b) the DIRBE/IRAS maps. Plus symbols represent
galaxies at southern declinations where the BH maps lack dust-to-gas ratio information, and
asterisks are those lacking any BH values.
THIS FIGURE AVAILABLE at http://astro.berkeley.edu/davis/dust/index.html
Fig. 7.— Slice of sky from (a) the BH map, (b) the Leiden-Dwingeloo H I map, (c) our
dust map with DIRBE resolution, and (d) our dust map with IRAS resolution. The slice
measures approximately 90◦× 30◦, centered at l = 100◦, b = +35◦.
THIS FIGURE AVAILABLE at http://astro.berkeley.edu/davis/dust/index.html
Fig. 8.— Full-sky dust map for the NGP (top) and SGP (bottom).


--- Page 55 ---
– 55 –
Fig. 9.— Power spectrum of dust. The four solid curves represent four quadrants in the
North Galactic sky at |b| > 45◦, while the four dashed curves represent four quadrants of
the South Galactic sky.


--- Page 56 ---
– 56 –
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
DQ
240 [MJy/Sr]
(a) Quadratic correction 240µ
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
DQ
100 [MJy/Sr]
(b) Quadratic correction 100µ
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Dwingeloo HI [K km/s]
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
DT [MJy/sr]
(c) Temperature corrected
Fig. 10.— The H I correlation with (a) DIRBE 240µm (corrected for zodiacal contamination),
(b) DIRBE 100µm (also corrected), and (c) our derived dust column density. This plot
demonstrates that the gas to dust relationship deteriorates at high ﬂux levels.


--- Page 57 ---
– 57 –
THIS FIGURE AVAILABLE at http://astro.berkeley.edu/davis/dust/index.html
Fig. 11.— Dust-to-H I gas ratio for the NGP (top) and SGP (bottom).
THIS FIGURE AVAILABLE at http://astro.berkeley.edu/davis/dust/index.html
Fig. 12.— Diﬀerence between our reddening map and that of Burstein & Heiles (1978, 1982)
in the NGP (top) and SGP (bottom).
Fig. 13.— Color-color diagram for PSC sources. The diagonal line eﬃciently discriminates
between galaxies (above the line) and stars (below). The square box is a strict color cut
which retains 70% of stars. For clarity, only 1 in 10 of the stars are plotted.


--- Page 58 ---
– 58 –
Fig. 14.— Contamination at 100µm from faint stars. The solid histogram represents the
derived contamination at 100µm from stars with ﬂuxes below our ﬂux cut.
The dotted
histogram shows the ﬂux from stars explicitly removed from the maps.


--- Page 59 ---
– 59 –
Table 1.
Masked sources in DIRBE maps
l
b
D25
X
S
f60
IRAS name
(deg)
(deg)
( Jy)
4.6
35.5
X
5.2
36.7
X
28.8
3.5
X
3041
18288-0207
49.4
-0.3
X
5263
19209+1421
80.1
-6.4
X
90.7
-46.5
X
94.4
-5.3
X
95.5
-87.5
X
X
105.0
68.8
X
106.8
5.3
X
11230
22176+6303
109.9
2.1
X
12830
22540+6146
111.5
0.8
X
7073
23113+6113
118.1
5.0
X
121.3
-21.5
X
M31
123.1
-6.4
X
126.6
-0.7
X
133.5
-31.3
X
133.7
1.2
X
12000
02219+6152
141.4
40.6
X
X
1170
09517+6954
165.4
-9.0
X
3121
04269+3510
168.0
-58.0
X
173.7
2.7
X
1709
05375+3540
178.0
-31.5
X
187.0
1.3
X
189.9
0.5
X
1157
06063+2040
197.8
56.0
X
205.3
-14.4
X
1291
05445+0016
206.6
-16.3
X
7894
05393-0156
209.0
19.6
X
213.7
-12.5
X
13070
06056-0621
221.4
45.1
X
X
5652
09452+1330
239.4
-5.1
X
1453
07209-2540
243.2
0.3
X
265.1
1.4
X
8333
08576-4334


--- Page 60 ---
– 60 –
Table 1—Continued
l
b
D25
X
S
f60
IRAS name
(deg)
(deg)
( Jy)
272.7
-39.5
X
274.0
-1.1
X
7500
09227-5146
279.3
-33.3
X
LMC
287.6
-0.6
X
13470
10431-5925
302.5
-44.4
X
SMC
305.4
0.2
X
8861
13092-6218
309.3
19.2
X
316.5
21.0
X
318.0
32.9
X
353.1
16.9
X
2196
16235-2416
359.9
-17.7
X
X
Note.
— List of sources removed from the D25
map used to construct the zodiacal-light model, the
temperature-correction X map, or the S map used to
combine the DIRBE and IRAS 100µm maps. Sources
removed from each map are denoted by an X. Those
that correspond to a bright source in the IRAS Point
Source Catalog have their 60µm ﬂux and name listed.


--- Page 61 ---
– 61 –
Table 2.
Zodiacal light model coeﬃcients
λ
Fit
A
B
Q
D/Gas
Scatter
Z
(µm)
( MJy/sr)/( K km/s)
(%)
( MJy/sr)
100
L
0.1607 ± 0.0005
−0.958 ± 0.015
...
0.01363 ± 0.00012
19
2.383 ± .014
140
L
0.0738 ± 0.0005
0.058 ± 0.015
...
0.02555 ± 0.00012
21
1.590 ± .032
240
L
0.0192 ± 0.0005
0.668 ± 0.015
...
0.01895 ± 0.00012
18
1.068 ± .023
100
Q
0.0810 ± 0.0020
0.623 ± 0.043
8.79E-4 ± 2.2E-5
0.01222 ± 0.00012
16
2.697 ± .014
140
Q
−0.0653 ± 0.0020
2.82 ± 0.043
1.53E-3 ± 2.2E-5
0.02309 ± 0.00012
19
2.132 ± .032
240
Q
−0.0504 ± 0.0020
2.05 ± 0.043
7.68E-4 ± 2.2E-5
0.01772 ± 0.00012
17
1.338 ± .023
Note. — A, B, and Q are the best-ﬁt coeﬃcients for the linear (L) or quadratic (Q) zodiacal light model. The ratio
between the model-corrected IR-emission and H I emission, D/Gas, has the quoted scatter in the range [0, 200] K km/s. After
removing the contribution from dust, Z is the zodiacal light plus the CIB averaged at high ecliptic latitudes (|β| > 85◦).


--- Page 62 ---
– 62 –
Table 3.
CIB at 100µm, 140µm, 240µm.
|β| cut
100µm Flux
140µm Flux
240µm Flux
(deg)
( MJy/sr)
( MJy/sr)
( MJy/sr)
0
−0.96 ± 0.04
0.06 ± 0.08
0.67 ± 0.05
5
−0.86 ± 0.04
0.28 ± 0.09
0.77 ± 0.06
10
−0.71 ± 0.04
0.55 ± 0.09
0.92 ± 0.06
15
−0.49 ± 0.05
0.87 ± 0.10
1.07 ± 0.07
20
−0.29 ± 0.05
1.13 ± 0.13
1.20 ± 0.08
30
0.02 ± 0.08
1.49 ± 0.20
1.34 ± 0.14
45
0.15 ± 0.19
1.69 ± 0.50
1.27 ± 0.33
Note.
— Derived CIB level using diﬀerent cuts in
ecliptic latitude for our zodiacal model. Errors denote
95% conﬁdence limits, excluding systematic errors. The
preferred solution uses the cut at |β| = 30◦, as described
in the text.


--- Page 63 ---
– 63 –
Table 4.
Coeﬃcients for Kb(α, T)
Coeﬀ
b = 100µm
b = 240µm
a0
1.00000
1.00000
a1
2.18053
−1.55737
a2
−4.89849
0.74782
a3
2.38060
b0
−0.80409
0.89257
b1
3.95436
−1.29864
b2
−4.27972
0.61082
b3
1.70919
Note. — Coeﬃcients for DIRBE
color-correction factors, Kb(α, T), ﬁt
using equation 11. Fits assume an
α = 2 emissivity model.


--- Page 64 ---
– 64 –
Table 5.
Regions of low dust column density
α2000
δ2000
l
b
DT
N(H I)
DT/N(H I)
Comments
(hr)
(deg)
(deg)
(deg)
( MJy/sr)
(1019 cm−2)
0 28
-42 44
318.4
-73.7
0.35
...
...
0 51
-27 08
0.0
-90.0
0.79
15.5
0.051
SG pole
3 57
-48 50
257.1
-48.4
0.33
...
...
3 59
-42 47
248.0
-49.2
0.30
...
...
4 01
-34 25
235.2
-49.1
0.20
...
...
4 03
-37 37
240.0
-48.6
0.17
...
...
4 05
-35 50
237.4
-48.2
0.20
...
...
4 44
-53 20
261.3
-40.2
0.23
...
...
10 36
+56 38
152.7
52.0
0.29
4.4
0.066
10 48
+57 02
150.5
53.0
0.44
5.8
0.077
Lockman hole
12 51
+27 08
0.0
90.0
0.66
10.1
0.065
NG pole
13 35
+39 09
88.4
74.9
0.27
8.6
0.031
13 42
+40 30
88.0
73.0
0.27
8.5
0.032
13 44
+57 04
109.2
58.6
0.28
10.3
0.027
13 54
+41 33
85.2
70.6
0.29
9.1
0.032
14 10
+39 33
75.3
69.5
0.29
7.2
0.041
22 43
-46 49
346.3
-58.1
0.41
...
...
23 22
-46 22
339.4
-64.0
0.38
...
...
Note. — Coordinates and values for the lowest column-density regions in the dust map,
the Lockman hole, and the Galactic poles.
Multiplication of DT by 0.0184 recovers the
magnitudes of reddening in E(B−V ). H I column densities are for the full velocity range
(−450 ≤vLSR ≤+400 km/s) of the Leiden-Dwingeloo maps, and are unavailable for the
southern holes. All numbers are averages over a one-degree aperture.


--- Page 65 ---
– 65 –
Table 6.
Relative extinction for selected bandpasses
Filter
λeﬀ
A/A(V )
A/E(B−V )
Filter
λeﬀ
A/A(V )
A/E(B−V )
( ˚A)
( ˚A)
Landolt U
3372
1.664
5.434
Stromgren u
3502
1.602
5.231
Landolt B
4404
1.321
4.315
Stromgren b
4676
1.240
4.049
Landolt V
5428
1.015
3.315
Stromgren v
4127
1.394
4.552
Landolt R
6509
0.819
2.673
Stromgren β
4861
1.182
3.858
Landolt I
8090
0.594
1.940
Stromgren y
5479
1.004
3.277
CTIO U
3683
1.521
4.968
Sloan u′
3546
1.579
5.155
CTIO B
4393
1.324
4.325
Sloan g′
4925
1.161
3.793
CTIO V
5519
0.992
3.240
Sloan r′
6335
0.843
2.751
CTIO R
6602
0.807
2.634
Sloan i′
7799
0.639
2.086
CTIO I
8046
0.601
1.962
Sloan z′
9294
0.453
1.479
UKIRT J
12660
0.276
0.902
WFPC2 F300W
3047
1.791
5.849
UKIRT H
16732
0.176
0.576
WFPC2 F450W
4711
1.229
4.015
UKIRT K
22152
0.112
0.367
WFPC2 F555W
5498
0.996
3.252
UKIRT L′
38079
0.047
0.153
WFPC2 F606W
6042
0.885
2.889
Gunn g
5244
1.065
3.476
WFPC2 F702W
7068
0.746
2.435
Gunn r
6707
0.793
2.590
WFPC2 F814W
8066
0.597
1.948
Gunn i
7985
0.610
1.991
DSS-II g
4814
1.197
3.907
Gunn z
9055
0.472
1.540
DSS-II r
6571
0.811
2.649
Spinrad RS
6993
0.755
2.467
DSS-II i
8183
0.580
1.893
APM bJ
4690
1.236
4.035
Note. — The above tabulates the magnitudes of extinction evaluated in diﬀerent passbands using the
RV = 3.1 extinction laws of Cardelli et al. (1989) and O’Donnell (1994). The ﬁnal column normalizes the
extinction to photo-electric measurements of E(B−V ).