--- Page 1 ---
Optic Disc and Cup Segmentation Methods for Glaucoma
Detection with Modiﬁcation of U-Net Convolutional Neural
Network
Artem Sevastopolsky1, *
1Department of Mathematical Methods of Forecasting,
Faculty of Computational Mathematics and Cybernetics,
Lomonosov Moscow State University
Glaucoma is the second leading cause of blindness all over the world, with ap-
proximately 60 million cases reported worldwide in 2010. If undiagnosed in time,
glaucoma causes irreversible damage to the optic nerve leading to blindness. The
optic nerve head examination, which involves measurement of cup-to-disc ratio, is
considered one of the most valuable methods of structural diagnosis of the disease.
Estimation of cup-to-disc ratio requires segmentation of optic disc and optic cup on
eye fundus images and can be performed by modern computer vision algorithms.
This work presents universal approach for automatic optic disc and cup segmenta-
tion, which is based on deep learning, namely, modiﬁcation of U-Net convolutional
neural network. Our experiments include comparison with the best known methods
on publicly available databases DRIONS-DB, RIM-ONE v.3, DRISHTI-GS. For both
optic disc and cup segmentation, our method achieves quality comparable to current
state-of-the-art methods, outperforming them in terms of the prediction time.
Keywords: glaucoma detection, eye fundus, image segmentation, computer vision, optic
disc segmentation, optic cup segmentation, convolutional neural network, deep learning,
U-Net.
*
artem.sevastopolsky@gmail.com
arXiv:1704.00979v1  [cs.CV]  4 Apr 2017


--- Page 2 ---
2
1.
INTRODUCTION
Glaucoma is the second leading cause of blindness all over the world, with approximately
60 million cases reported worldwide in 2010, and an increase by 20 million is expected in
2020 [1, 2]. If left unnoticed, glaucoma can cause irreversible damage to the optic nerve
leading to blindness. Therefore, diagnosing glaucoma at early stages is very important [1].
Optic nerve examination includes eye fundus test, which requires a doctor localizing areas
of optic disc and optic cup (central part of optic disc) and ﬁnding their borders. Presence
of glaucoma can be identiﬁed by noticing optic nerve cupping, i.e. increase of optic cup in
size. One of the main indicators of the disease is cup-to-disc ratio (CDR) — a ratio between
heights of cup and disc [1]. It is considered one of the most representative features of optic
disc and cup areas for glaucoma detection, and, according to [3], eye with CDR of at least
0.65 is usually considered as glaucomatous in clinical practice. Fig. 1 shows an example of
healthy and glaucoma-suspicious eye.
(a) Healthy eye
(b) Glaucoma-suspicious eye
Figure 1. An example of healthy and glaucoma-suspicious eye from RIM-ONE v.3 [4] database. Right-
hand picture of each example contains enlarged optic disc area, where optic disc border is indicated by outer
dashed line, optic cup border — by inner dashed line. Note that CDR is larger for glaucoma-suspicious eye.
Segmentation of the optic disc and cup and determination of the CDR are very time-
consuming tasks currently performed only by professionals. As stated in [5], according to
a research, full segmentation of optic disc and cup requires about eight minutes per eye for
a skilled grader. Solutions for automated analysis and assessment of glaucoma can be very
valuable in various situations, such as mass screening and medical care in countries with


--- Page 3 ---
3
signiﬁcant lack of qualiﬁed specialists [6, 7].
There are several approaches to development of computer vision algorithms for glaucoma
detection based on eye fundus images. First approach is to determine the presence of the
disease directly from fundus images, which involves either manual or automatic extraction
of image features, derived from color, position and pairwise relation of pixels.
Another
approach is to build algorithms for optic disc and cup segmentation, then, based on that,
read out disc and cup dimension and from that judge on presence of the disease. In this
work we investigate the latter pipeline, since it can provide more transparent and reliable
solution for a medical doctor.
Recognition quality and prediction time are the major requirements to the solution for
automatic segmentation of eye parts.
In order for a computer to be a decision-making
system or at least an automatic eye scanner, it must make segmentation errors very seldom.
Prediction time is also very important, especially when it is required to analyze large number
of pictures in a small amount of time. Training time may be a concern in case retraining of
an algorithm on larger database is needed frequently. However, exact requirements to the
method depend on a speciﬁc setting of an automatic assessment system.
2.
RELATED WORK
In this section we give an overview of several methods for optic disc and cup segmentation
that have been evaluated by their authors on publicly available datasets with both images
and groundtruth provided.
For optic disc segmentation task, authors of [8] use Fully-convolutional neural network
[9] based on VGG-16 net [10] and transfer learning technique. They achieve superhuman
quality of recognition in terms of Dice score (see section 3 of this paper) and boundary error
(mean distance between the boundary of the result and that of the ground truth), since
obtained results are more consistent with a gold standard than a second human annotator
used as control.
For optic cup segmentation task, authors of [11] use 2-layer multi-scale convolutional
neural network trained with boosting. Training process pipeline is multi-stage and includes
patches preparation and neural network training. For pre-processing, entropy ﬁltering [12]
in L*a*b* color space is performed for extracting the most important points of an image,


--- Page 4 ---
4
followed by contrast normalization and stardardization of patches. Gentle AdaBoost [13]
algorithm is then used to train convolutional ﬁlters, which are represented as linear regressors
for small patches. At the test time, image propagation through the network is followed by
unsupervised graph cut [14]. The method was evaluated on DRISHTI-GS [15, 16] database,
and it outperformed all other existing methods in terms of Intersection-over-Union score and
Dice score (see section 3 of this paper). However, it is necessary to note that this method
crops images by area of their optic disc (cup) before performing segmentation of the optic
disc (cup). It makes the method not applicable to new, unseen images of full eye fundus,
since it requires a bounding box of optic disc and cup to be available in advance.
The paper [17] suggests an improvement to the aforementioned method in the train-
ing procedure for convolutional ﬁlters. Evaluation on DRISHTI-GS and RIM-ONE v.3 [4]
databases for optic disc and cup is provided. Compared to the previous method, it does not
require the images to be cropped by the area of optic cup for its segmentation, which makes
the solution applicable to previously unseen images.
Method from the paper [8] has several drawbacks. It uses a deep neural network which
takes a long time to train, model is large in terms of size of the ﬁle with network parameters
and amount of required GPU memory. Authors of the paper were not pursuing a goal of the
optic cup segmentation, which is a more challenging task than the optic disc segmentation.
Besides, we were unable to reproduce the reported results.
Methods from [11] and [17]
are very complicated, hard to program and to reproduce the results. Being prepared for
execution on CPU, they also have large prediction time. As written before, [11] method
required images to be cropped by the area of optic cup in advance, which is another drawback
of a method. Some methods that are not mentioned in this section, such as [5, 18, 19], have
mostly been evaluated either on datasets that are not currently publicly available, or on
very small datasets, or used metrics dependent on proportion between classes, thus making
it harder to compare with them.
3.
THE PRESENTED APPROACH
In this section, the universal method is proposed for segmentation of optic disc and
cup.
Our approach is primarily based on deep learning techniques, which have made a
revolution in all tasks of computer vision in the last years and currently provide state-of-the-


--- Page 5 ---
5
art solutions in image classiﬁcation, segmentation and many other image recognition tasks.
Another advantage of convolutional neural networks as main tools of deep learning is their
universality, as the same network can usually recognize various patterns in diﬀerent images
and for diﬀerent objects.
Fig. 2 presents a pipeline of our method for optic disc segmentation, Fig. 3 — for optic
cup segmentation.
Contrast Limited Adaptive Histogram Equalization (CLAHE) [20] is
used as a pre-processing for both methods. It equalizes contrast by changing color of image
regions and interpolating the result across them. For optic cup, we ﬁrstly crop the images
by bounding box of optic disc (with margin from each side), which can be acquired from
trained algorithm for optic disc.
RGB 
Image
CLAHE
Neural 
network
Output 
binary map
Figure 2. Pipeline of the proposed method for the task of optic disc segmentation.
RGB 
Image
Neural 
network
Cropping 
by area of 
optic disc
Output 
binary map
CLAHE
Figure 3. Pipeline of the proposed method for the task of optic cup segmentation.
Core component of the method is a convolutional neural network built upon U-Net [21].
It is a neural network for image segmentation that accepts image as an input and returns
probability map as an output. U-Net was introduced as a Fully-convolutional neural net-
work capable of training on extremely small datasets and achieving results competitive with
sliding-window based models. Trained with speciﬁc data augmentation and enhancement
techniques, it outperforms existing methods on several biomedical image segmentation chal-
lenges [21].


--- Page 6 ---
6
Convolutional layer
with 3x3 ﬁlters +
ReLu + dropout
Max Pooling (2x)
Upsampling (2x)
Transfer and
concatenation
3
32
32
64
64
64
32
32
64
32
64
64
64
64
64
64
64
128
64
64
128
64
64
128
64
64
96
1
Convolutional layer
with 1x1 ﬁlter +
sigmoid + dropout
Figure 4. Architecture of neural network employed in our method.
The architecture presented in the paper is depicted in Fig. 4. Like the original U-Net, it
consists of contracting path (left side) and an expansive path (right side). Contracting path
structurally repeats a typical architecture of convolutional part of the classiﬁcation network,
e.g. VGG-16 [10]. On the expansive path, information is merged from layers of contracting
path of appropriate resolution and layers of expansive path of lower resolution, so that a
whole network recognizes patterns at several scales. Input image is ﬁrstly passed through
a convolutional layer with ﬁlters of 3 x 3 pixels spatial resolution; number of ﬁlters in a
layer is shown in the ﬁgure above a blue rectangle representing layer’s output. Afterwards,
Dropout regularization [22] and ReLu activation function (f(x) = max(0, x)) are applied.
The same is repeated again, and Max Pooling operation is applied, reducing image width
and height by two. Image is then passed through aforementioned sequence of layers multiple
times, until resolution is low enough. On the expansive path, the same convolutional layers
are applied, interleaved with Upsampling layers, which raise image width and height by two


--- Page 7 ---
7
in a trivial way.
Compared to original U-Net, the presented modiﬁcation has less ﬁlters in all convolutional
layers and does not possess an increasing number of ﬁlters for decreasing resolution. Our
experiments have shown that these changes do not lower quality of recognition for our tasks,
but make the architecture much more lightweight in terms of number of parameters and
training time. As a loss function, we use l(A, B):
l(A, B) = −log d(A, B), where:
d(A, B) =
2 P
i,j
aijbij
P
i,j
a2
ij + P
i,j
b2
ij
,
where A = (aij)H
W
i=1 j=1 is a predicted output map, containing probabilities that each pixel
belongs to the foreground, and B = (bij)H
W
i=1 j=1 is a correct binary output map.
d(A, B) is an extension of Dice score for binary images Dice(A, B) =
2|A∩B|
|A|+|B|: if A and
B contain only binary values, d(A, B) and Dice(A, B) are equal, but d(A, B) also supports
values that lie in (0, 1).
This extension allows us to compute gradient of the loss func-
tion. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) with momentum [23] was used as an optimization
method. During the training, data augmentation was used to enlarge the training set by
artiﬁcial examples. Images were subject to random rotations, zooms, shifts and ﬂips.
It is necessary to note that the proposed method does not require any preliminary cropping
of input images to area of the optic disc, as it can segment the optic disc and the optic cup
on a full eye fundus image. Detailed comparison of the presented method with the existing
ones is given in the section 4.
4.
EXPERIMENTS
This section of the paper contains comparison between our solution and existing methods
for both considered tasks. Results are reported for publicly available datasets DRIONS-
DB [24], RIM-ONE v.3 [4], DRISHTI-GS [15, 16], which contain groundtruth segmentation
for optic disc (and some for optic cup as well). DRIONS-DB contains 110 full eye fundus
images with optic disc segmentation; RIM-ONE v.3 — 159 images cropped by optic disc
area, such that its diameter occupies about a ﬁfth part of an image side length, with optic
disc and cup segmentation; DRISHTI-GS — 50 full eye fundus images with optic disc and


--- Page 8 ---
8
cup segmentation. We evaluate the quality of trained algorithms by Intersection-over-Union
(IOU) score: |A∩B|
|A∪B| and Dice score:
2|A∩B|
|A|+|B|, where A = (aij)H
W
i=1 j=1 is a predicted output map,
containing probabilities that each pixel belongs to the foreground, and B = (bij)H
W
i=1 j=1 is a
correct binary output map. These quality measures do not depend on image scale, object
scale and class imbalance. Dice score is also equal to F1 score — harmonic mean of precision
and recall.
We used a learning rate of 10−3 for optic disc and a learning rate of 3 · 10−4 for optic
cup segmentation. Momentum was set to 0.95, mini-batch of size 1 was used in order to
minimize required amount of GPU memory. Resolution of input images was set to 256 x 256
for optic disc and to 512 x 512 for optic cup segmentation before their cropping. Region of
interest was then resized to 128 x 128 by bilinear interpolation.
For the task of optic disc segmentation, we compare our solution with the method from [8]
paper (further referred as DRIU, as the name of the paper suggests), which is the best method
that we have found in terms of IOU and Dice score functions for investigated datasets. For
the task of optic cup segmentation, we compare with the method from [11] (further referred
as BCF, as the name of the paper suggests) and from [17]. Score estimates are computed by
cross-validation with 5 folds.
Table 1. Comparison of methods for optic disc segmentation. ”—“ indicates that the result is not
reported. Training time is computed as a product of one epoch time and average number of epochs.
DRIONS-DB RIM-ONE v.3
Training time on
Prediction # parameters
IOU
Dice
IOU
Dice
RIM-ONE v.3
time
Our approach
0.89
0.94
0.89
0.95
26 s · 382 = 9932 s
0.1 s
6, 6 · 105
DRIU [8]
0.88
0.97
0.89
0.96
56 s · 200 = 11200 s
0.13 s
1, 5 · 107
Zilly et al. [17]
—
—
0.89
0.94
3296 s
5.3 s
1890
The presented algorithms were implemented on GPU with Python 2.7 programming lan-
guage and Keras framework for training of neural networks (with Theano backend [25]).
CLAHE implementation from Scikit-Image library was also used. All estimates of compu-
tational time are given for Amazon Web Services [26] g2.2xlarge instance with one NVIDIA
GRID (Kepler GK104) GPU and Intel Xeon E5-2670 CPU for 256 x 256 images; estimate
of Zilly et al. [17] method’s prediction time is given for a 2.66 GHz quad-core CPU, as


--- Page 9 ---
9
Table 2. Comparison of methods for optic cup segmentation. ”—“ indicates that the result is not
reported.
DRISHTI-GS RIM-ONE v.3 Prediction time
IOU
Dice
IOU
Dice
Our approach
0.75
0.85
0.69
0.82
0.06 s
Zilly et al. [17] 0.85
0.87
0.80
0.82
5.3 s
BCF [11]
0.86
0.83
—
—
—
reported. Prediction time of BCF [11] is expected to be close to Zilly et al. [17] prediction
time, since these methods are very similar.
(a) Input image
(b) Predicted
(c) Correct
(d) Input image
(e) Predicted
(f) Correct
(g) Input image
(h) Predicted
(i) Correct
(j) Input image
(k) Predicted
(l) Correct
Figure 5. Visual comparison of the predicted results and correct segmentation on RIM-ONE v.3 for the
optic disc (a)-(c), (g)-(i) and cup (d)-(f), (j)-(l). On (d)-(f), (j)-(l) region of the optic disc is shown as an
input image.
For optic disc: (a)–(c): best case (IOU = 0.93, Dice = 0.97), (g)–(i): worst case (IOU = 0.80, Dice = 0.90);
for optic cup: (d)–(f): best case (IOU = 0.93, Dice = 0.97), (j)-(l): worst case (IOU = 0.46, Dice = 0.64).
The results of the experiments indicate that the proposed method not only demonstrates
quality competitive with quality of the existing methods in a majority of score metrics, but
also possesses lowest prediction time, lowest training time among deep learning solutions, has
small number of parameters (whole model can be saved in a ﬁle of only 5 MB; DRIU model
requires about 120 MB) and is very easy to program with the use of modern frameworks.


--- Page 10 ---
10
Despite that we gave estimates of prediction time for a machine equipped with modern
(though not top level) GPU, for GPU with lower performance a prediction time can be only
a few times larger. These advantages make the proposed method being a good solution for
automatic glaucoma assessment on mobile devices.
5.
CONCLUSION
In this paper we show that our method based on modiﬁed U-Net neural network can
provide results similar or better than existing methods for the tasks of optic disc and cup
segmentation on eye fundus images. The same method, applied to both tasks, achieves high
quality of segmentation, which proves its applicability to various problems of image recog-
nition. Advantages of the proposed solution also include its simplicity, simple programming
with the use of modern frameworks and lowest possible prediction time. Experiments re-
sults and visual comparison show that automatic optic disc segmentation can be done at
the quality competitive with human. However, optic cup is more challenging to recognize,
which is supported by the fact that its border is much more subtle. We believe that there is
a room for improvement for optic cup segmentation, and further research is needed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are especially grateful to Alexander G. D’yakonov, Professor, Dr. Sci. (Lomonosov
MSU), for supporting and supervising this work. We would like to thank Leonid M. Mestet-
skii, Professor, Dr. Tech. (Lomonosov MSU), for initiating and supporting opthalmological
research at the department. We are also grateful to Youth Laboratories company and espe-
cially to Konstantin Kiselev for provided computational resources.


--- Page 11 ---
11
REFERENCES
1. A. Almazroa, R. Burman, K. Raahemifar, and V. Lakshminarayanan, “Optic disc and optic cup
segmentation methodologies for glaucoma image detection: a survey,” Journal of ophthalmology,
vol. 2015, 2015.
2. H. A. Quigley and A. T. Broman, “The number of people with glaucoma worldwide in 2010 and
2020,” British journal of ophthalmology, vol. 90, no. 3, pp. 262–267, 2006.
3. M. U. Akram, A. Tariq, S. Khalid, M. Y. Javed, S. Abbas, and U. U. Yasin, “Glaucoma detection
using novel optic disc localization, hybrid feature set and classiﬁcation techniques,” Australasian
physical & engineering sciences in medicine, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 643–655, 2015.
4. F. Fumero, S. Alay´on, J. Sanchez, J. Sigut, and M. Gonzalez-Hernandez, “Rim-one:
An
open retinal image database for optic nerve evaluation,” in Computer-Based Medical Systems
(CBMS), 2011 24th International Symposium on, pp. 1–6, IEEE, 2011.
5. G. Lim, Y. Cheng, W. Hsu, and M. L. Lee, “Integrated optic disc and cup segmentation with
deep learning,” in Tools with Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ICTAI), 2015 IEEE 27th International
Conference on, pp. 162–169, IEEE, 2015.
6. A. Bastawrous, H. K. Rono, I. A. Livingstone, H. A. Weiss, S. Jordan, H. Kuper, and M. J.
Burton, “Development and validation of a smartphone-based visual acuity test (peek acuity)
for clinical practice and community-based ﬁeldwork,” JAMA ophthalmology, vol. 133, no. 8,
pp. 930–937, 2015.
7. V. Lodhia, S. Karanja, S. Lees, and A. Bastawrous, “Acceptability, usability, and views on
deployment of peek, a mobile phone mhealth intervention for eye care in kenya: Qualitative
study,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 4, no. 2, 2016.
8. K.-K. Maninis, J. Pont-Tuset, P. Arbel´aez, and L. Van Gool, “Deep retinal image understand-
ing,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Inter-
vention, pp. 140–148, Springer, 2016.
9. J. Long, E. Shelhamer, and T. Darrell, “Fully convolutional networks for semantic segmenta-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 3431–3440, 2015.


--- Page 12 ---
12
10. K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman, “Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recog-
nition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
11. J. G. Zilly, J. M. Buhmann, and D. Mahapatra, “Boosting convolutional ﬁlters with entropy
sampling for optic cup and disc image segmentation from fundus images,” in International
Workshop on Machine Learning in Medical Imaging, pp. 136–143, Springer, 2015.
12. R. Gonzalez, R. Woods, and S. Eddins, Digital Image Processing Using MATLAB. Prentice-
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2003.
13. H. Do˘gan and O. Akay, “Using adaboost classiﬁers in a hierarchical framework for classifying
surface images of marble slabs,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 37, no. 12, pp. 8814–
8821, 2010.
14. M. B. Salah, A. Mitiche, and I. B. Ayed, “Multiregion image segmentation by parametric kernel
graph cuts,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 545–557, 2011.
15. J. Sivaswamy, S. Krishnadas, A. Chakravarty, G. Joshi, A. S. Tabish, et al., “A comprehensive
retinal image dataset for the assessment of glaucoma from the optic nerve head analysis,” JSM
Biomedical Imaging Data Papers, vol. 2, no. 1, 2015.
16. J. Sivaswamy, S. Krishnadas, G. D. Joshi, M. Jain, and A. U. S. Tabish, “Drishti-gs: Retinal
image dataset for optic nerve head (onh) segmentation,” in Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), 2014
IEEE 11th International Symposium on, pp. 53–56, IEEE, 2014.
17. J. Zilly, J. M. Buhmann, and D. Mahapatra, “Glaucoma detection using entropy sampling
and ensemble learning for automatic optic cup and disc segmentation,” Computerized Medical
Imaging and Graphics, vol. 55, pp. 28–41, 2017.
18. H. Li and O. Chutatape, “Automated feature extraction in color retinal images by a model
based approach,” IEEE Transactions on biomedical engineering, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 246–254,
2004.
19. J. Jose and J. Kuruvilla, “Detection of red lesions and hard exudates in color fundus images,”
International Journal of Engineering and Computer Science, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 8583–8588, 2014.
20. R. Szeliski, Computer vision: algorithms and applications. Springer Science & Business Media,
2010.
21. O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical im-
age segmentation,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, pp. 234–241, Springer, 2015.


--- Page 13 ---
13
22. G. E. Hinton, N. Srivastava, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Im-
proving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1207.0580, 2012.
23. I. Sutskever, J. Martens, G. E. Dahl, and G. E. Hinton, “On the importance of initialization
and momentum in deep learning.,” ICML (3), vol. 28, pp. 1139–1147, 2013.
24. E. J. Carmona, M. Rinc´on, J. Garc´ıa-Feijo´o, and J. M. Mart´ınez-de-la Casa, “Identiﬁcation of
the optic nerve head with genetic algorithms,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 43, no. 3,
pp. 243–259, 2008.
25. Theano Development Team, “Theano: A Python framework for fast computation of mathemat-
ical expressions,” arXiv e-prints, vol. abs/1605.02688, May 2016.
26. “Amazon web services.” https://aws.amazon.com.
AUTHORS
Artem Sevastopolsky (born in 1996) is a student of Lomonosov Moscow
University, faculty of Computational Mathematics and Cybernetics, depart-
ment of Mathematical Methods of Forecasting, graduating in 2017.
His
research interests include machine learning, computer vision, deep learning,
image and video processing.